

1
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
STRATEGIC GUIDELINES
Regardless of the type of function to be performed and/or police operations
to be conducted, all PNP personnel must know by heart and shall comply with and
apply the following principles and procedures:
To Serve and Protect
The responsibility of every police officer is to serve the public and protect
life and property.
To Respect Human Rights and Dignity of Person
All PNP personnel shall respect and uphold the human rights and dignity of
all persons at all times.
General Principles



2
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL GUIDELINES
Section 1-1 Police Uniform and Accessories
1.1 Agency Prescribed Uniform. A police officer shall always wear the
prescribed uniform for the kind of police operation to be undertaken (Annex “A”).
1.2 Appearing Before the Public. When wearing the police uniform, a police
officer shall, at all times, appear to look presentable, respectable, smart, and wellgroomed. A police officer shall refrain from doing unnecessary activities and/or
actions while on duty.
1.3 Carrying of Basic Police Equipment. Every police officer on patrol,
whether on board a vehicle or on foot patrol, shall always carry with him/her his/
her issued firearm, and other equipment such as but not limited to restraint device,
impact device and personal protective equipment. He/she shall also use other
accessories required for the specific police operation being conducted.
Section 1-2 Categories of Police Operations
1.4 Patrol Operations. The most basic police function and known as the
backbone of policing.
1.5 Law Enforcement Operations. Include service of warrant of arrest,
implementation of search warrant, enforcement of visitorial powers of the Chiefs of
Police, and other anti-criminality operations.
1.6 Internal Security Operations. Include counterterrorism operations and
Chapter 1



3
similar operations against other threat groups that are conducted to ensure internal
security.
1.7 Public Safety Operations. Include critical incident management procedures,
search, rescue and retrieval operations, hostage situation, civil disturbance
management operation, management of health hazards and other operations that
promote public safety.
1.8 Special Police Operations. Include high-risk checkpoint and roadblock
operation, police assistance in the implementation of order from the court and
other quasi-judicial bodies, security to major and special events, aircraft hijacking
operations, visit, board, search and seizure of marine vessels, and similar police
operations that are conducted by police units with specialized training on the
peculiarity of the mission or purpose.
1.9 Investigation Operations. Include investigation of crime or incident,
Scene of the Crime Operations (SOCO), administrative investigation and other
investigative work necessary to determine facts and circumstances for filing cases
criminally or administratively.
1.10 Police Community Relations. Include three interrelated dimensions
to accomplish its mission namely: community affairs and development, public
information, and information development operations to forge partnership and
strengthen collaboration and linkages with the community.
Chapter 1



4
CHAPTER 2
OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES
All PNP personnel shall respect and uphold the human rights and dignity of
all persons at all times.
Section 2-1 Pre-Operational Clearance
In all planned police operations, the team leader of the operating team/s
shall secure a Pre-Operation Clearance prior to the conduct of operation. This
clearance must be approved by their Chief/Commander/Head of Office/Unit and
must be submitted at the Operations Section/Division of the concerned operating
police units for record purposes.
Section 2-2 Coordination
2.1 Inter-Office Coordination. The operations officer or Team Leader/s (TL)
of Local Police Units (LPUs) operating outside their territorial jurisdiction and
National Support units (NSUs) shall, whenever practicable, coordinate personally
at any levels of police offices (Police Regional Office (PRO) to Municipal Police
Station (MPS)) or other friendly units within whose jurisdiction the operation is to
be conducted.
2.2 Coordination by Filing Coordination Form. Prior to the launching of
the operation except in cases where the formal (in writing) inter-unit coordination
cannot be made due to the nature and/or urgency of the situation such as, but
not limited to, cross-jurisdiction pursuit operations, coordination should be made
formally using the prescribed Coordination Form, which shall be filed with the
Chapter 2



5
concerned operation center of the Police Regional, Provincial or City Police Office
and Police Stations (Annex “B”).
2.3 Coordination by Practical/Available Means of Communication. In cases
where formal inter-unit coordination is not feasible, the Police Unit concerned shall
endeavor to notify the Local Police Unit (LPU) through any practical/available means
of communication including but not limited to electronic or signal communication at
any time before the operation and shall accomplish and furnish the LPU a written
incident report immediately after the termination of the operation.
Section 2-3 Requirements of Police Operations
2.4 Basic Requirements. Police operations such as but not limited to arrest,
search and seizure, checkpoint, roadblocks, and civil disturbance management
shall, whenever applicable and practicable, be conducted as follows:
a. With marked police vehicle;
b. Led by a Police Commissioned Officer (PCO) or the most senior Police
Non-Commissioned Officer (PNCO) in the absence or unavailability of
a PCO; and
c. With personnel in prescribed police uniform except for covert operatives
when serving warrant of arrest provided personnel in uniform shall be
present during the arrest
d. With the use of Body Worn Cameras (BWCs) and/or Alternative
Recording Devices (ARDs) during the conduct of searches and arrests.
2.5 Use of Megaphones and Similar Instruments/devices. During actual
police intervention operations, the Team Leader shall use peaceful means
including the use of megaphones or any other similar instruments/devices to warn
or influence the offender/s or suspect/s to stop and/or peacefully surrender.
2.6 Accessories. A police officer may carry or use accessories appropriate
to the police operation being performed. Accessories may include, ballistic vest,
handheld radio, first aid kit, flashlight, hand cuff, whistle and non-lethal equipment
Chapter 2



6
including but not limited to baton, truncheon, and night stick to be used in a nonarmed confrontation with a violent, uncooperative and unruly offender.
2.7 Use of Body Worn Camera
a. Chain of Custody over the Recordings in the Execution of Arrest and
Search:
The chain of custody over the recordings shall at all times be preserved
from improper access, review, and tampering. It shall cover the following
events:
1) Recording of the footage using the BWCs/ARDs;
2) Turnover of the BWCs/ARDs used by the arresting or searching
team, or of the data by the media representative to the Data
Custodian to which they belong;
3) Downloading of the data by the Data Custodian;
4) Redaction of personal identities by the Data Custodian or his/her
representative, whenever applicable;
5) Retrieval of recording data and their transfer to an external media
storage device by the Data Custodian;
6) Submission and delivery of the recordings contained in an
external media storage device to the court.
b. The BWC/ARD shall be used/activated during the conduct of arrest,
search and whenever practicable, in cases of warrantless arrests. The
rules on the use of BWC under A.M. No. 21-06-08-SC shall be observed.
c. The BWC/ARD shall not be used/activated in the following circumstances:
1) In police facilities unless in an official capacity, or as part of an
investigation procedure;
2) Conduct of any personal activity (in any location where individuals
have a reasonable expectation of privacy, such as restrooms,
Chapter 2



7
locker rooms, or break rooms). As a reminder, there is potential
criminal and civil liability if this restriction is violated;
3) Conduct of any personal activity in locations where individuals
have reasonable expectation of privacy such as in residences,
unless the recording is being made pursuant to a valid arrest or
search warrant of the individuals or locations;
4) During strip or body cavity searches when such is necessary as
provided in the warrant;
5) Conduct of tactical planning before the planned operation;
6) Intentionally activated to record conversations/communications
between PNP personnel without their knowledge during routine,
and other non-law enforcement related activities;
7) Between confidential informants or undercover officers;
8) Privileged communications between the subject of recordings
and other individuals, such as attorneys, members of the clergy,
peer support councilors and medical professionals;
9) While on the grounds of any public, private or parochial elementary
or secondary school, hospitals, churches and other places of
worship except when responding to an imminent threat to life or
health; and
10) Other circumstances as may be provided by the trial court issuing
the warrant which is part of constitutional privilege and where
the dignity of an individual may outweigh the public necessity for
recording.
Section 2-4 Use of Force Policy
2.8 Application of Necessary and Reasonable Force. In the lawful
performance of duty, a police officer shall use necessary and reasonable force to
Chapter 2



8
accomplish his/her mandated task of enforcing the law and maintaining peace and
order.
A police officer, however, is not required to afford the offender/s attacking him/
her the opportunity for a fair or equal struggle. The necessity and reasonableness
of the force employed will depend upon the number of aggressors, nature and
characteristic of the weapon used, physical condition, size and other circumstances
to include the place and occasion of the assault. The police officer is given the
sound discretion to consider these factors in employing reasonable force.
During confrontation with an armed offender, only such necessary and
reasonable force shall be applied as would be sufficient to overcome the aggression
by the offender; subdue the clear and imminent danger posed by him/her; or
to justify the force/act under the principles of self-defense, defense of relative,
defense of stranger or fulfillment of duty, in accordance with the elements laid
down by law and jurisprudence. The excessive use of force to arrest or immobilize
the suspect during police operation is prohibited.
2.9 The Force Continuum. It is a linear-progressive decision-making process
which displays the array of police reasonable responses commensurate to the
level of suspect/law offender’s resistance to effect compliance, arrest and other
law enforcement actions (Annex “C”).
It allows police officer responses to be flexible and/or employ reasonable
force in either sequential, consecutive or combination of options against the
dynamic suspect/s or law offender/s threats or resistances. In all instances, the
professional and respectable deportment of police as public safety servants, civil
use of language, well-mannered decorum and utmost respect for human rights
shall be observed.
a. Three Approaches on The Use of Force Continuum
1) Non-Lethal Approach. This involves the police presence in
crime-prone areas and the employment of activities or actions
to persuade and/or request cooperation of people particularly
suspects and law offenders to police instructions and other
control efforts.
Chapter 2



9
Table 1.1 Non-Lethal Approach
Officer’s Presence
Suspect Threats or Resistance:
Cooperative Police Response/Equipment
•	 Compliant and cooperative with
police control efforts.
•	 Display professional and respectable
deportment.
•	 Wear the prescribed uniform with the
equipment securely attached to the rig
or utility belt.
Verbal Command
Suspect Threats or Resistance:
Non-Verbal and Verbal Non-Compliance Police Response/ Equipment
•	 Non-compliant, uncooperative or
resist to follow police control efforts.
•	 Do not present immediate physical
resistance or threats of physical injury
to the police or to other persons.
•	 Employ communication techniques,
including: request, persuasion,
command and/or issuance of warning
by voice, print and/or electronic in clear
and understandable manner.
•	 Use of whistle
•	 Use of language that is known to the
offender or in the national language
•	 The verbal command shall be done in a
loud, firm and clear manner.
•	 Use of sign language for speechimpaired offenders
Chapter 2



10
Physical Control-Soft Hand Technique
Suspect Threats or Resistance:
Passive Resistance Police Response/Equipment
•	 Unarmed
•	 Non-compliant, uncooperative and
verbally abusive.
•	 Attempts to curl into fetal position,
pull away, escape or evade.
•	 Do not present immediate physical
resistance or threat of physical injury
to the police or other persons.
•	 Ensure the employment of reasonable
force that will cause no harm or minimal
chance of injury to the suspect or law
offender.
•	 Includes but not limited to:
o Use of bare hands to guide, escort,
hold and/or apply restraining
equipment (handcuffs or flex cuffs/
plastic strap).
o Application of body joint
manipulation, immobilization and/or
touch pressure point stimulation to
ensure cooperation, compliance or
surrender.
Physical Control-Hard Hand Technique
Suspect Threats or Resistance:
Active Resistance Police Response/Equipment
•	 Unarmed.
•	 Non-compliant, uncooperative and
verbally abusive.
•	 When responded with police control
efforts, the suspect use physical
threats and/or aggression.
•	 Uses mechanical or other objects
to thwart the police control efforts
by physically securing or holding to
another object.
•	 As much as possible, the employment
of reasonable force will not result to
serious injury.
•	 Employ reasonable physical control
and/or pain-compliant techniques, such
as: punches, kicks and other striking
techniques to ensure cooperation,
compliance or surrender.
•	 May orally summon as many persons
as he/she deems necessary to assist
him/her in effecting the arrest.
Chapter 2



11
2) Less Lethal Approach. This involves the employment of less lethal
equipment that do not cause serious injury and/or death and that
less physical measures have been tried and deemed inappropriate
purposely to ensure cooperation, compliance or surrender. The
age, gender and health condition of offenders shall be considered
before the employment of less lethal equipment.
Table 1.2 Less Lethal Approach
Suspect Threats or Resistance:
Assaultive Resistance
Police Response/Equipment
Impact Weapons (such as Batons,
Truncheons and/or Night Stick).
•	 Unarmed.
•	 Non-compliant, uncooperative and
verbally abusive to the police and
other persons.
•	 Unlawful aggression or attempts
(apparent intent) to make physical
contact, control or assault.
•	 Employs or uses bodily force or
active aggression (push, throw,
strike, tackle or physical harm) that
may or may not cause injury to the
police officer or other persons/self.
•	 Exert due diligence in the employment
of reasonable force through impact
weapons and ensure that it will not
cause serious injury or death.
•	 Target only the fleshy parts of the
body such as arms, torso, legs, and
thighs.
•	 As much as possible, avoid hitting the
head, neck, face, groin, solar plexus,
kidneys and spinal column areas.
Chapter 2



12
3) Lethal Approach. This involves the employment of lethal
equipment usually as last resort. Lethal force will only be employed
when all other approaches have been exhausted and found to
be insufficient to thwart the life-threatening actions or omissions
posed by armed suspect or law offender. This approach carries
with it the greater responsibility as it may result to severe injury
and serious bodily harm and/or death.
Table 1.3 Lethal Approach
Suspect Threat or Resistance:
Serious Injury and/or Death Police Response/Equipment
•	 Armed and dangerous.
•	 Unlawful aggression and/or intention to
cause severe injury, serious bodily harm
and/or death to police officer/s and other
people.
•	 The use of conventional weapons, such
as hand guns and rifles, are authorized to
prevent or repel the unlawful aggression
and immobilize the suspect.
•	 As much as possible, avoid hitting the
head or other vital parts of the body.
•	 Wounded persons/suspects must be
given first aid and/or brought to the
nearest hospital at the first possible
opportunity
b. Guidelines on the De-Escalation of Response. At any time when the
suspects or law offenders comply, cooperate or surrender to police
control efforts, the police officer must de-escalate to the appropriate level
of approach. However, he/she shall remain vigilant on the possibility
of escalation of response whenever reasonable and necessary or
depending on the prevailing situation.
2.10 Responsibility of the Police Officer in Charge of the Operations. The
police officer who is in charge of the operation shall, at all times, observe the Force
Continuum and exercise control over all police personnel in the area of operation
to protect lives and properties.
Chapter 2



13
Section 2-5 Use of Firearm During Police Operations
2.11 Use of Firearm When Justified. The use of firearm is justified if the offender
poses an imminent danger of causing death or injury to the police officer or other
persons. The use of firearm is also justified under the doctrines of self-defense,
defense of a relative, and defense of a stranger. However, one who resorts to selfdefense must face a real threat on his/her life, and the peril sought to be avoided
must be actual, imminent and real. Unlawful aggression should be present for selfdefense to be considered as a justifying circumstance.
The police shall not use warning shots during police operation except when
the police officer is outnumbered and overpowered, and his/her life and limb is in
imminent danger.
2.12 Firing at Moving Vehicles is prohibited. A moving vehicle and its occupants
shall not be fired upon except when its occupants pose imminent danger of causing
death or injury to the police officer or any other person, and that the use of firearm
does not create any danger to the public and outweighs the likely benefits of its
non-use.
In firing at a moving vehicle, the following parameters should be considered:
a. The intent of the suspect/s to harm the police officer or other persons;
b. The capability of the suspect/s to harm with certainty the police officer
or other persons; and
c. Accessibility or the proximity of the suspect/s from the police officer and
other persons.
2.13 Filing of an Incident Report After the Use of Firearm. A police officer who
fires his/her service firearm or weapon during a confrontation with an offender or
offenders must submit an incident report outlining the circumstances necessitating
the use of his/her firearm.
Chapter 2



14
2.14 Procedures After an Armed Confrontation. Immediately after an armed
confrontation, the officer who is in charge of the operation, when applicable, shall:
a. Secure the site of confrontation;
b. Check whether the situation still poses imminent danger;
c. Take photographs;
d. Evacuate all wounded to the nearest hospital regardless of the extent
of injury;
e. Keep arrested suspects in isolation;
f. Conduct debriefing on all involved PNP operatives;
g. Submit After-Operations Report; and
h. Ensure psychological stress counselling for all involved PNP
Operatives.
Chapter 2



15
CHAPTER 3
POLICE OPERATIONS
All PNP personnel shall respect and uphold the human rights and dignity of
all persons at all times during the conduct of any police operations.
Rule 1 Patrol Operations
1.1 Patrol Guidelines
a. Conduct briefing before and debriefing after patrol operations
b. Perform firearm and equipment check prior to dispatch.
c. Observe precautionary measures and personal safety while on patrol;
d. Plan out patrol routes based on prevailing crime trends and patterns;
e. Observe defensive driving and follow traffic rules and regulations;
f. Establish good rapport with people on your beat and be familiar with all
the people in the community;
g. Patrol members must be always on the look-out for indications of vices
and other illegal activities on their beat;
h. Patrol members must be knowledgeable of all conditions, events and
details of places on their beat;
Chapter 3



16
i. Be observant of people, places, situations or conditions and develop
an inquisitive attitude especially if the subject appears to be slightly out
of the ordinary;
j. Keep under close observation actions of juveniles, troublemakers /
agitators and the mentally ill/retarded persons and report information
to the concerned agency for appropriate action;
k. When requiring proof of identification from any person, let him/her
hand it over to you;
l. Patrol members must inform tactical operations center before
responding to any incident.
1.2 Patrol Duties
a. Patrol Supervisors
1) Make a patrol plan with the following details:
a) Area Coverage: safe haven, ambush areas and crimeprone areas;
b) Organizational detail of personnel;
c) Duration;
d) Stand-by points; and
e) Route plan.
2) Designate members of the patrol team/s;
3) Conduct personnel and equipment check;
4) Conduct briefing prior to dispatch by disseminating any orders,
directives or instructions from the Chief of Police (COP) or higher
authorities and new policy or guidelines being implemented by
the PNP Organization;
Chapter 3



17
5) Render hourly report of personnel location and situation through
radio/telephone/cellphone to Police Community Precinct (PCP)/
Station Headquarters Tactical Operation Center (TOC);
6) Render after-patrol report duly signed by duty supervisor. PCP
Commanders shall collate and submit significant details to the
Station Patrol Supervisor, who in turn, will submit the same to the
Provincial/District Patrol Supervisor; and
7) Conduct debriefing immediately after the completion of patrol
duties.
b. Patrol Officers
1) Attend the roll call formation before his/her Tour of Duty for briefing
and likewise attend the after Tour of Duty formation for debriefing;
2) Patrol the assigned beats, observe and check suspicious people,
structures/buildings, compounds and vehicles;
3) Observe and monitor public gatherings, prevent disorders and
disperse unlawful assemblies;
4) Inspect and/or conduct surveillance in various business
establishments and other installations and remove hazards to
public safety;
5) Check suspicious vehicles (private, public, or commercial/delivery
vehicles) in the course of their patrol;
6) Report occurrences and conditions which relate to crime, public
peace, order and safety;
7) Prevent crimes and arrest criminal offenders;
8) Conduct regular visitations, dialogues/consultations with the
residents and other stakeholders;
9) Assist personnel of responsible agencies/unit in facilitating the
flow of traffic at busy intersections/roads within his/her Area of
Chapter 3



18
Responsibility (AOR), assist and provide pedestrian information
such as directions and street locations;
10) Respond to calls, entertain complaints, initiate the investigation
and protection of the crime scene and minimize the after-effects
of accidents, fires and other catastrophes;
11) Wear the prescribed patrol uniform;
12) Have the necessary equipment; and
13) Strictly observe “Buddy System” during the patrol operations.
c. Guidelines and Procedures when Responding to Calls for Police
Assistance
1) Gather and note down in the patrol officer’s notebook all available
data as to the nature of the calls, date, time and name of the caller.
It may be regular, urgent or emergency in nature.
2) Responding officers shall validate first before responding to calls
for police assistance especially in areas with presence of threat
groups.
3) The manner of approach will be dependent on the nature of the
call, either with haste/secrecy or with/without flashing lights and
sirens.
4) Consider the pertinent factors like the time, traffic conditions, the
possibility of greater damage and the neighborhood characteristics.
5) Whenever practicable and available, use and activate the BWC
and comply with the guidelines and policies on the use thereof.
6) Stop the patrol car some distance from the scene.
7) Approach the scene on foot, in complete silence and exercising
extreme caution.
8) Immediately attend to the injured unless the other members of the
patrol are in imminent danger.
Chapter 3



19
9) Focus all efforts to arrest criminals; however, priority shall be given
to aiding the injured.
10) Determine the crime committed, identify and question briefly the
victim/complainant and possible witnesses at the scene.
11) If the suspects or criminals have fled the scene before the arrival
of the patrol team, interview witnesses and immediately relay any
information gathered regarding the composition, appearance of
the suspect, weapons used, mode and direction of escape and
other information which may lead to the arrest of the suspects to
the Operations Center for the conduct of dragnet operations
12) When responding to street fights/brawls, the patrol member
may call for back-up before intervening. If there are no injuries
and insufficient corroborative statements obtained to identify
who started the fight, bring both parties to the police station for
appropriate action.
13) Treat all calls for police assistance properly including complaints
of nuisances caused by excessive sound, odor, smoke, blinding
light among others
14) When responding to calls for police assistance due to suspected
explosive device, never attempt to handle, move or lift the object.
Instead contact TOC and request for Explosive Ordinance Disposal
Team/K9 (EODT/K9). Immediately isolate and cordon the area
within a safe distance from the suspected device. Divert the flow
of traffic if necessary.
15) When responding to calls from beerhouses, KTV bars, or any other
similar establishments, ensure that all the lights are switched on.
16) When responding to request for police assistance involving
domestic violence, dispute between neighbors and landlords/
tenants, as much as possible, seek the presence of barangay
officials and DSWD personnel as the case may be.
17) When responding to crime incidents involving a woman, either
as victim or suspect, the presence of a female police officer is
necessary.
Chapter 3



20
18) When responding to police assistance related to highly infectious
diseases, immediately inform the barangay concerned and the
Station TOC for the observance of the health standard protocol.
19) When responding to cybercrime, secure and preserve the evidence
and immediately seek assistance from cybercrime investigators.
20) When responding to a hostage taking situation, secure the scene,
establish perimeter security and inform tactical operations center.
Rule 2 Law Enforcement Operations
2.1 Stopping and Frisking (Pat-Down Search)
a. When to Stop and Frisk (Pat-Down Search)
1) Stopping. The police officer may stop a person only when there
is genuine reason to believe, based on experiences and the
particular circumstances that a criminal activity may be afoot.
The police officer must be able to point to specific facts that,
when taken together with rational inferences, reasonably warrant
the stop. Such facts include, but not limited to the following:
a) The person is reported to be allegedly involved in a criminal
activity;
b) The actions or demeanor of the person suggest that he/she
is engaged in a criminal activity;
c) The person is carrying something illegal or when his/her
clothing bulges in a manner that suggests he/she is carrying
a weapon; and
d) The person is seen at the time and place proximate to an
alleged crime incident and/or flees at the sight of a police
officer.
Chapter 3



21
2) Body Frisking (Pat-Down Search). A police officer has the right to
perform body frisking if the person has been stopped with genuine
reason to believe that he/she carries weapon/s and poses a threat
to the police officer’s or another person’s safety. Circumstances
which may justify body frisking (pat-down search) include but not
limited to the following:
a) Visual indication suggesting that the person is carrying a
firearm or other deadly weapon;
b) The type of crime believed to have been committed by the
person, particularly crimes of violence where the threat of
use or use of deadly weapon is involved; and
c) The threatening demeanor of the person.
b. Procedures and Guidelines
1) Stopping
a) When approaching the person, the police officer shall clearly
identify himself/herself and present his/her identification
card.
b) Police officers shall be courteous at all times but remain
cautious and vigilant.
c) Before approaching more than one person, police officers
should determine whether the circumstances warrant a
request for back-up or whether the stopping should be
delayed until such back-up arrives.
d) Police officers shall confine their questions in relation to the
grounds for stopping the person. In no instance shall a police
officer stop a person longer than the period reasonably
necessary.
e) Police officers are not required to inform the person of his/
her rights under the law (i.e. Miranda Warning, Anti-torture
law, etc.) unless the person is placed under arrest.
Chapter 3



22
2) Body Frisking (Pat-Down Search). When genuine reason justifies
body frisking (pat-down search), it shall be done with due caution,
restraint, and sensitivity in the following manner:
a) Whenever possible, body frisking shall be done by at least
two police officers, one to do the search while the other
provides security. it shall be done with the person in a
standing position with hands raised. the police officers are
permitted only to feel the outer clothing of the person. Police
officers shall not place their hands inside the pockets of the
clothing unless they feel an object that could probably be a
weapon, such as a gun, knife, club, or the like.
b) If the person is carrying an object such as a handbag,
suitcase, briefcase, sack, or other similar items that may
conceal a weapon, the police officer shall not open the item
but instead put it in a place out of the person’s reach.
c) If the external patting of the person’s clothing fails to disclose
evidence of a weapon, no further search may be made. If a
weapon is found and the possession of which constitutes a
violation of the law, the police officer shall arrest the person
and conduct a complete search.
c. Reporting After Stopping or Body Frisking. If after stopping or body
frisking and the police officer finds no basis for making an arrest, he/
she should put it on record in his/her patrol notebook. If he/she finds a
ground for a valid warrantless arrest, then an arrest shall be made.
2.2 Checkpoints
a. Authority to Establish Checkpoints. The establishment of checkpoints
shall be authorized by the Head of Office of the territorial PNP unit
and manned by uniformed PNP personnel. Other units may establish
checkpoints in coordination with the Head of Office of the territorial PNP
unit in the area. For this purpose, the Heads of Offices of territorial units
are the following:
1) Regional Director (RD);
Chapter 3



23
2) District Director;
3) Provincial Director;
4) City Director;
5) Chief of City/Municipal Police Station;
6) Station Commander;
7) Sub-Station Commander; and
8) Police Community Precinct Commander.
b. Composition. In the establishment of checkpoint, the checkpoint team
shall be composed of, but not limited to, the following:
1) Team Leader (TL) - shall lead and take responsibility in the conduct
of checkpoint preferably a Police Commissioned Officer (PCO). In
the absence of a PCO, the most Senior Police Non-Commissioned
Officer (PNCO) will act as Team Leader;
2) Spotter/Profiler – shall point/profile suspected vehicle subject for
checkpoint;
3) Verifiers – shall conduct document verification, search, seizure
and arrest, if necessary, initial custody of seized evidence;
4) Search/Arresting personnel – shall search, seize illegal items and
arrest offenders;
5) Forward/Rear Security– shall provide security in the checkpoint
area and block/pursue fleeing suspects/vehicle;
c. Checkpoint Guidelines
1) Checkpoints are established to enforce laws, rules, and regulations,
and when there is a need to arrest a criminal or fugitive from justice.
Chapter 3



24
2) Mobile checkpoints are authorized only when established in
conjunction with ongoing police operations. Only marked vehicles
with blinkers turned on shall be used in mobile checkpoints.
3) Designation of the personnel manning the checkpoint shall be
left to the sound discretion of the Team Leader (TL), preferably
with female personnel especially when there is an anticipated
involvement of a female suspect.
4) The PNP Checkpoint team shall be composed of a minimum of
eight personnel with a TL, two verifiers, one spotter, two forward
security and two rear security.
5) The team manning the checkpoints must have immediate contact
with any elected public official, and representative from the National
Prosecution Service (NPS) or the media in case illegal drugs are
seized or recovered.
6) The team should encourage the participation of the Local
Government Units (LGUs), PNP accredited Civil Society
Groups, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), business
organizations, media and other stakeholders during the conduct
of police checkpoint operations. However, their participation must
be limited only as observers except for LGU personnel mandated
to enforce laws and ordinances such as but not limited to traffic
enforcers, meat inspectors and Barangay Public Safety Officers
(BPSO).
7) PNP personnel manning the checkpoint must have a presentable
appearance while wearing the prescribed uniform. Likewise, the
civilian members must also be in their organization’s uniform with
their names conspicuously displayed for identification. In no case
shall the civilian components be allowed to bear firearms during
the checkpoint.
8) The area where the checkpoint shall be established must be
well-lighted with a visible signage bearing the name and contact
number of the PNP unit and the TL.
9) Due courtesy must be accorded to all road users during the
conduct of checkpoint.
Chapter 3



25
10) Team members must greet all persons subject for inspection,
extend apology for the inconvenience, appeal for understanding,
state the reasons of the checkpoint and thank them for their
cooperation.
11) The team must signal the motorist(s) to slow down and courteously
request to turn-off the headlights and turn on cabin lights.
12) The conduct of inspection of vehicle during a routine checkpoint
is limited to a visual search, done with due respect to all road
users and conducted in a manner of least inconvenience. The
occupants cannot be compelled to step out of the vehicle. Any
search, seizure, and arrest shall be in accordance with the law.
13) A valid search must be authorized by a search warrant duly issued
by an appropriate authority. However, a warrantless search can be
made in the following cases:
a) When there is genuine reason to believe that the occupant/s
of the vehicle have just committed, is actually committing or
is about to commit a crime; or
b) On the basis of prior information which are reasonably
corroborated by other attendant matters.
14) Violations/infractions of the law during the checkpoint shall be
immediately acted upon following legal procedures. Arrested
persons must be apprised of their constitutional rights.
15) The security of the PNP personnel, and most especially that of
the civilians participating in the checkpoint, must be given due
consideration in the planning of the operation.
16) As much as possible, only the forward/rear security team members
are allowed to display their rifles and should be positioned where
they can best provide security to the checkpoint team.
17) Checkpoint personnel may also provide police assistance in the
vicinity e.g., giving directions to inquiring motorists or passersby.
Chapter 3



26
18) Designated TL assigned at the checkpoint shall be responsible
for the actuations and behavior of his/her personnel and shall be
accountable under the doctrine of Command Responsibility.
19) The TL must submit an after-checkpoint report immediately upon
termination of the operation.
d. Procedures in the Conduct of PNP Checkpoint
1) The TL shall inform his/her Chief of Police/ Station Commander
and Station TOC of the location of the checkpoint to be established;
2) The Unit Commander or official representative of NSUs and mobile
forces must coordinate with the concerned LPU through its TOC
or by other means before commencing with the checkpoint;
3) The station TOC shall then coordinate with the Higher Headquarters
(HHQ) TOC, adjacent PNP units and other friendly forces of the
established checkpoints;
4) The TL shall brief the PNP personnel, as well as the civilian
components present, regarding the proper conduct of the
checkpoint and their assigned tasks prior to their deployment;
5) The TL shall account his/her personnel and check if they are in
the prescribed uniform. He/she shall ensure that their names are
visible at all times. If wearing a ballistic vest, raincoat, reflectorized
vest and other accessories worn over the uniform, their names
shall likewise be visible;
6) The TL shall also check the following equipment including, but not
limited to:
a) Marked police vehicles (including police motorcycle if
available);
b) Signages:
(1) Warning signs: (e.g., slowdown checkpoint ahead,
checkpoint 20 meters ahead, etc); and
Chapter 3



27
(2) Information signs: name and contact number of the
unit and TL.
c) Firearms with basic load of ammunition;
d) Ballistic vest;
e) Handheld and vehicle base radios;
f) Flashlights;
g) Megaphone; and
h) BWC or ARD.
7) The Spotter/Profiler of the team will be pre-positioned in a place
where he/she can best point/profile suspected vehicles prior to
their approach to the checkpoint;
8) Search/Arresting personnel shall flag down suspected vehicles
and conduct search, seizure and arrest, if necessary. The search
must be in accordance with the plain view doctrine except when
there is a genuine reason to believe, based on experiences and
the particular circumstances of each case, that criminal activity
may be afoot;
9) In the event of seized drugs, the seizing personnel of the team
having initial custody and control of the drugs shall immediately
conduct physical inventory and photograph the same on site in
the presence of the accused or the person/s from whom such
items were confiscated and/or seized, or his/her representative
or counsel and any elected public official to include representative
from the media or NPS, if available, who shall be required to sign
the copy of the inventory and be given a copy thereof. However,
under justifiable grounds or circumstances, like when the safety
of the team is compromised, the inventory may be done at the
nearest police station or at the nearest office of the apprehending
team;
10) In case the team has no investigator as team member, the arrested
person/s and seized items shall be turned over to the station duty
investigator for proper disposition;
Chapter 3



28
11) In the event that the checkpoint is ignored, and the occupants of
the vehicle opened fire on the personnel manning the checkpoint,
the response of the team shall be in accordance with the use of
Force Continuum as prescribed in Chapter 2 Section 2-4 of this
POP;
12) The TL shall inform the station TOC before terminating the
checkpoint. He/she shall conduct debriefing of personnel and
submit after activity report for information of the COP/Station
Commander prior submission to HHQ.
e. Procedures in the Conduct of On-the-Spot (Hasty) Checkpoints
1) Hasty checkpoint shall be immediately established upon receipt of
the instruction/ order/clearance from the Unit Commander;
2) PNP personnel conducting mobile patrols on board patrol vehicles
will initially man the checkpoint, to be complemented with the arrival
of reinforcement. A collapsible prescribed signage with markings:
“Stop, Police Checkpoint” if available, indicating also the name
and the contact number of the concerned police office/unit and TL
conducting the operations, will be used for the purpose;
3) In the case of PNP personnel conducting Internal Security Operation
(ISO) or foot patrol, where a vehicle and collapsible signage is not
readily available, the team shall hastily put-up improvised barriers/
barricades or early warning signages to indicate the established
checkpoint that is manned by said personnel;
4) The team shall immediately inform the station TOC of the nearest
police unit of the exact location of the hasty checkpoint established
to include the name and contact number of the TL and equipment
used;
5) Where there is a possibility of high-risk stop and/or arrest, and
public safety might be at risk, no civilian or media shall be allowed
in the area;
6) The Unit Commander of the personnel manning the hasty
checkpoint shall immediately send additional personnel, equipment
Chapter 3



29
and signage to the area in order to convert the Hasty Checkpoint
into a standard Checkpoint; and
7) As soon as the Hasty Checkpoint is converted into a standard
Checkpoint, TL shall follow the procedures in the conduct of PNP
checkpoint stated in Rule 2.2d of this POP.
f. Procedures in the Conduct of Joint Checkpoints
1) Commission on Elections (COMELEC) Checkpoints
a) The establishment of COMELEC checkpoints must be in
accordance with the Omnibus Election Code, election laws
and prevailing resolutions. The procedures in the conduct
of PNP checkpoint stated in Rule 2.2d of this POP shall be
made supplemental;
b) As much as possible, there shall be at least one COMELEC
checkpoint for each city/ municipality. However, additional
checkpoints, may be established in coordination with the
Election Officer (EO).
c) Additional checkpoints coming from PNP units other than the
LPUs shall be coordinated with the concerned COP/Station
Commander and EO.
d) In establishing on-the-spot (hasty) checkpoints, the team
leader shall give prior notice and coordination with the EO
having jurisdiction over the area.
2) Inter-Agency Checkpoints (DENR, DA, BFAR, etc)
a) There shall be an existing agreement and/or written request
from the agency concerned prior to the establishment of
checkpoint.
b) In case of apprehension, the nominal complainant shall be
the concerned agency and will be in charge in the conduct
of investigation, filing of cases and custody of evidence. All
arrested persons shall be in the custody of the PNP.
Chapter 3



30
c) The signboard to be placed on the checkpoint shall bear the
names and contact numbers of both PNP and agency TL.
3) Joint PNP-AFP Checkpoints
a) The PNP shall take the lead role in a joint PNP-AFP
checkpoint.
b) The signboard to be placed on the checkpoint shall bear the
names and contact numbers of both PNP and AFP TL.
c) In case of arrest and seizure, the PNP shall take cognizance
of the case.
g. General Procedures to be Followed When Checkpoint is Ignored
1) If the checkpoint is ignored and/or the motorist bumps the signage
in an attempt to elude arrest or avoid inspection, the team shall
pursue the fleeing motorist and immediately inform the adjacent
units about the situation and the available description of the
vehicle and passenger/s to establish hasty defensive roadblock
and dragnet operation.
2) The pursuing team shall use megaphones or built-in public address
system in the police car with blinkers and sirens switched on during
the pursuit to order the fleeing motorist to stop and to warn other
road users following the rules on the use of firearm during police
operations in Chapter 2 Section 2-5 of this POP.
3) If the motorist stops, the procedures in flagging down vehicles in
Rule 2.3 paragraphs e to i of this POP shall apply.
4) If the fleeing motorist opens fire at the pursuing team, the reasonable
force provided in the use of force continuum in Chapter 2 Section
2-4 of this POP to overcome the aggression must be employed.
2.3 Flagging Down Vehicles
a. Procedures in Flagging Down Vehicles for Possible Involvement in the
Commission of a Crime.
Chapter 3



31
1) Before flagging down the vehicle, call the station TOC and provide
the following available information:
a) Plate number and/or conduction sticker;
b) Brand/make, series, type (sedan, SUV, AUV, etc) and color;
c) Number and/or description of occupants;
d) Reason(s) for the planned intervention;
e) Location and its direction.
2) The station TOC shall immediately verify with the provincial/city
highway patrol team with the said vehicle information. Simultaneous
verification can be made with the Land Transportation Office (LTO)
vehicle verification system thru text number 2600 by texting “LTO
vehicle (vehicle plate number).” Example: LTO vehicle ABC1234;
3) If upon verification, the motor vehicle is not involved in any crime
the patrollers shall no longer pursue the vehicle;
4) If subject of an alarm or complaint, the patroller shall direct the
driver to pull over or stop on the road side.
5) If the vehicle stops, the patrollers shall likewise position their
vehicle in an advantageous distance behind the subject vehicle.
6) Using the vehicle public address (PA) system, patrollers shall
introduce themselves and command the driver to do the following:
a) Roll down the window;
b) Turn on the hazard light;
c) Turn on the cabin light if necessary; and
d) Switch off the engine;
Chapter 3



32
7) If the vehicle occupants are compliant, the patrollers shall cautiously
approach the vehicle from behind and perform the following:
a) Inform them the reason why they were stopped;
b) Require the driver to present his/her driver’s license and OR/
CR of the vehicle; and
c) Direct the driver to follow them to the nearest police station/
unit;
8) Verify the authenticity of the driver’s license with the LTO vehicle
verification system thru text number 2600 by texting “LTO license
(license number)”. Example: LTO license A1234567890
9) If the vehicle occupants are non-compliant, the patrollers shall
perform the following as warranted by the circumstances:

a) Remain in the patrol vehicle, request for back-up, remain
tactically alert and warn civilians in the area of a possible
armed confrontation;
b) Using the PA system, repeatedly demand the driver to comply
with the instructions in Rule 2.3a6) and to throw the ignition
key outside the vehicle;
c) If capable, effect the arrest of occupants in accordance with
the provisions on Arrest Without Warrant under Rule 2.6e of
this POP; and
d) If back-up is necessary, wait for their arrival before effecting
the arrest;
10) If the motorist flees, despite the repeated warnings the team shall
pursue the fleeing motorist and immediately update the station
TOC and adjacent units about the current situation;
11) If the intervention resulted in an armed confrontation, the response
shall be in accordance with the Force Continuum in Chapter 2
Section 2-4 and Procedures After an Armed Confrontation in
Chapter 2 Section 2-5 paragraph 2.14 of this POP; and
Chapter 3



33
12) Update the station/unit TOC of the development.
b. Procedures in Flagging Down Vehicles for Violation of Traffic Laws,
Rules and Regulations
1) The applicable procedures provided in Rule 2.3a shall be followed;
2) If the motor vehicle is under a nationwide alarm, it shall be reported
to the nearest HPG office within 48 hours;
3) Immediately issue a Traffic Violation Receipt (TVR), or Temporary
Operator’s Permit (TOP) as appropriate. Never indulge in
prolonged and unnecessary conversation or argument;
4) Confiscation of any unauthorized or illegal device or accessory
such as those provided in Presidential Decree (PD) No. 96 shall
be covered by a receipt;
5) In case of impoundable offenses, inform the motorist of the violation
and where the vehicle will be impounded. The said vehicle shall be
covered with a Technical Inspection and Inventory Receipt (TIIR)
and an impounding receipt; and
6) In cases where there is reasonable ground to believe that the
driver is drunk, the procedures in flagging down motorists who are
under the influence of alcohol, and/or dangerous drugs and similar
substances provided in Rule 2.3c of this POP shall be followed.
c. Procedures in Flagging Down Motorists Who are Under the Influence of
Alcohol, and/or Dangerous Drugs and Similar Substances.
In the implementation of the Anti-Drunk and Drugged Driving Law
(RA 10586), the flagging down should be incidental to a traffic stop or
preceded by a probable cause that the deputized PNP personnel has
reasonable ground to believe that the motorist is under the influence
of alcohol, dangerous drugs and/or other similar substances upon
personally witnessing a traffic offense committed by means of lane
straddling, making sudden stops, speeding, swerving or weaving.
Chapter 3



34
The evident smell of alcohol in a driver’s breath, generally slurred
speech in response to questioning, bloodshot or reddish eyes, flushed
face, poor coordination, difficulty in understanding and responding
intelligently to questions shall also constitute probable cause.
As far as practicable, there must be at least one personnel in the
accosting team who is trained and deputized by the LTO and equipped
with a calibrated Alcohol Breath Analyzer (ABA). In the absence of a
deputized PNP personnel, the team shall immediately seek his/her
assistance if there is a suspected drunk or drugged motorist.
1) Screening for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol
The deputized police officer shall perform and be guided by the
following:
a) Upon personal determination of probable cause, he/she
shall flag down the motor vehicle, direct the motorist to step
out of the vehicle, and determine whether the driver is under
the influence of intoxicating drink or substance. If there is
reasonable ground to believe that the motorist is drunk,
expressly inform the motorist of his/her assessment and
direct him/her to perform all the three field sobriety tests (eye
test, walk-and-turn, and one-leg stand) on site;
b) Record the motorist’s responses to the field sobriety tests to
form part of the records of the case;
c) If the motorist fails any of the three field sobriety tests,
determine his/her blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level,
through the use of the ABA on site;
d) If the motorist passes all of the three field sobriety tests, he/
she shall be cited for the initial traffic offense only and shall
no longer be subjected to ABA test;
e) A motorist who refuses to undergo the mandatory testing as
required shall have his/her driver’s license confiscated and
be cited for all other violations that he/she has committed. If
upon assessment the motorist poses hazard to the public,
Chapter 3



35
he/she will not be allowed to continue driving and he/she
shall be brought to the police station for proper disposition;
f) A motorist who registered a BAC above the allowable limit
shall be placed under arrest and the motor vehicle shall
be turned over to the nearest LTO or other authorized
impounding area;
g) In case of a BAC within the allowed limit, he/she shall only be
cited for the initial traffic offense;
h) A motorist who has undergone and passed the field sobriety
test and/or ABA test may be subjected to a drug screening
test;
i) If the ABA test exceeds the allowable limit, the deputized
PNP personnel with the assistance of the duty investigator
shall prepare pertinent documents for the filing of case.
2) Screening for Driving Under the Influence of Dangerous Drugs
and Other Similar Substances
The deputized police officer shall perform and be guided by
the following:
a) Upon personal determination of probable cause, he/she shall
flag down the motor vehicle, direct the motorist to step out
of the vehicle, and determine whether the motorist is under
the influence of intoxicating drink or substance. If there is
reasonable ground to believe that the motorist is drugged, he/
she shall expressly inform the motorist of his/her assessment
and shall bring the motorist to the nearest police station;
b) The motorist shall be subjected to a drug screening test by
the crime laboratory. If found positive, a drug confirmatory
test shall be conducted;
c) A motorist who has undergone and passed the drug test shall
not be subjected to a field sobriety test and/or ABA test;
Chapter 3



36
d) After a positive confirmation, the deputized PNP personnel
with the assistance of the duty investigator shall prepare
pertinent documents for the filing of case;
e) If the confirmatory drug test turns out negative, the motorist
shall only be cited for the initial traffic offense.
3) Mandatory Alcohol and Chemical Testing of Drivers Involved in
Road Crash Incidents
a) A motorist involved in a road crash incident resulting in the
loss of human life or physical injuries shall be subjected
to onsite field sobriety test and ABA testing, whenever
practicable, and thereafter, chemical tests, including a drug
screening test and, if necessary, a drug confirmatory test
as mandated under RA 9165, to determine the presence
and/or concentration of alcohol, dangerous drugs and/or
similar substances in the bloodstream or body. Other alcohol
testing equipment, such as Gas Chromatography-Mass
Spectroscopy (GCMS) may be used, whenever the use of
an ABA is not practicable under prevailing circumstances.
b) A motorist who refuses to undergo the mandatory testing as
required shall have his/her driver’s license confiscated and
be cited for all other violations that he/she has committed.
He/she shall be brought to the nearest police station for the
filing of the appropriate case.
2.4 High-Risk Stop and High-Risk Arrest. This is the stopping/accosting and
restraint of armed and dangerous person/s, aboard a vehicle/vessel or on foot,
including the power to use all necessary and legal means to accomplish such end.
a. General Setting
1) Initial Stage
Upon receipt of information regarding the movement of persons/
groups involved in the commission of a crime, or unauthorized
movement of armed person/s or group/s, including government troops,
the following shall be performed:
Chapter 3



37
a) Ensure that there are personnel/team tailing and monitoring
the movement of the fleeing person/s or group/s;
b) Organize appropriate tactical security forces utilizing
maximum firepower, armor, water and air assets as the case
may be;
c) Deploy the security forces to stopping zones in defensive
position; and
d) Seal off the area and establish strong roadblocks/ barricades.
2) Effecting a High-Risk Stop and Arrest
When effecting high-risk stop, the police officer shall:
a) Exert utmost effort to persuade the suspects to halt or stop
their movement;
b) Start with the procedural conduct of regular warrantless
arrest where arrest is inevitable;
c) Ensure proper documentation of the process; and
d) Respect the rights of all the persons involved.
3) During Violent Stage
The PNP shall strictly adhere to Use of Force Policy provided in
Chapter 2 Section 2-4 of this POP, particularly on the Force Continuum.
b. Maritime Setting
1) Initial Stage
a) For movements of suspects towards ports, piers and coastal
areas, the concerned units shall coordinate with the Maritime
Group (MG);
Chapter 3



38
b) Coordination with other maritime agencies such as the
Philippine Coast Guard (PCG), Philippine Navy (PN), Bureau
of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) among others
shall be made when necessary; and
c) In case the suspects are aboard a vessel, the description of
the vessel shall be determined and the location for possible
maritime interdiction shall be identified for deployment of
police patrol vessel.
2) Effecting a High-Risk Stop and Arrest
a) During seaborne interdiction, the applicable procedure for
high-risk vessel boarding shall be followed under the Maritime
Law Enforcement procedures of the MG;
b) During the high-risk vessel boarding, the procedure on
the Force Continuum under Chapter 2 Section 4 shall be
followed; and
c) After the high-risk vessel interdiction, the arrested suspects
and seized evidence shall be processed following the rule on
arrest, search and seizure.
3) During violent stage
a) The patrol vessel shall be maneuvered in a position and
direction that will minimize possible damage to the vessel
and minimize risk to the interdiction team;
b) During this stage, the procedures on the Force Continuum
under Chapter 2 Section 2-4 of this POP and the Maritime
Law Enforcement procedures of the MG shall be followed.
c) All injured suspect shall be brought to the nearest hospital
and provided medical intervention as necessary;
d) All arrested suspects and seized evidence shall be processed
following the rule on arrest, search and seizure; and
Chapter 3



39
e) The suspect’s vessel shall be brought to the impounded area
pending the disposition of the case filed in court.
c. Airport Setting
1) Landside Area
a) Initial Stage
If a vehicle disregarded the Vehicle Screening Area (VSA) and
drove fast towards the terminal building, the following procedures
shall be undertaken:
(1) VSA personnel shall immediately inform all security
forces in the airport using radio, cellphone and other
fastest means of communication; and
(2) They shall pursue the fleeing vehicle and stop them
before reaching the terminal building.
b) Effecting a High-Risk Stop and Arrest
The VSA personnel shall direct the driver to park at the
roadside following the procedures in flagging down vehicles
provided under Rule 2.3a of this POP.
(1) If the fleeing vehicle failed to stop, the VSA personnel
shall immediately inform the Aviation Security Group
(AVSEGROUP) personnel at the terminal building to
activate airport lockdown procedure; and
(2) They shall continue pursuing the fleeing suspects until
arrested.
c) During Violent Stage
(1) If the fleeing vehicle deliberately hit the airport users
or rammed the airport terminal barriers, AVSEGROUP
personnel shall use or employ all necessary and
absolute force to stop the vehicle and its occupants.
Chapter 3



40
(2) If the vehicle finally stops, follow the applicable
provisions of the Force Continuum provided in Chapter
2 Section 2-4 of this POP.
2) Airside Area
a) Initial Stage
If the fleeing vehicle is able to reach the terminal building
and its occupants dismounted, the following procedures shall be
undertaken:
(1) Immediately direct the terminal building guards to close
the entrance gate; and
(2) If the suspect is unarmed, direct him/her to stop and
surrender following the procedures on Arrest provided
under Rule 2.6 of this POP.
b) Effecting a high-risk stop and arrest
The contingency plan for such incident embodied in the
airport security program of the concerned airport shall be applied.
c) During violent stage
If the fleeing vehicle was not stopped and has reached the
airside area, the contingency plan of such incident embodied in the
airport security program of the concerned airport shall be applied.
2.5 Police Defensive Roadblock. Police Defensive Roadblock is a temporary
installation or hastily built barricade set for halting traffic to facilitate the neutralization
of an armed person/suspect onboard a motor vehicle.
a. Pre-Conditions in Establishing Police Defensive Roadblocks. A police
defensive roadblock may be established in any of the following
conditions/situations:
1) The object vehicle/s must be the subject of a recent flash alarm;
Chapter 3



41
2) The driver/occupants of the vehicle are presumed hostile and will
not stop at the checkpoint;
3) The vehicle disregarded a police-established checkpoint when
flagged down;
4) The identified vehicle and occupants must be the subject of a
police case/combat operational plan;
5) There is unauthorized troop movement; or
6) There must be validated information on any of the following:
a) On-going hot pursuit/police chase;
b) Movement of suspected armed persons onboard a motor
vehicle;
c) Report of suspected armed men who have just committed a
crime;
d) Vehicle carrying escaped prisoner; or
e) Armed motorcycle riding criminals.
b. Procedures in Establishing Roadblock
1) Upon receipt of information/order to immediately establish a police
defensive roadblock, the Officer-of-the-Day (OD) or the most senior
police officer on duty of the concerned unit shall organize sufficient
police tactical security forces, utilizing maximum firepower and
other available equipment (if any) and shall immediately proceed
to the designated area;
2) Upon arrival, immediately set up physical barriers using all available
resources in the vicinity. The TL shall perform the following:
a) Inform the headquarters the exact location of the roadblock to
include personnel involved, available equipment and marked
vehicles;
Chapter 3



42
b) Brief the elements/members on the purpose of the police
roadblock and their method of intervention;
c) Immediately contact adjacent units to inform them of the
situation so that these units can conduct dragnet operation,
while the members of the pursuing team shall tail or pursue
the fleeing suspect’s vehicle;
d) Designate forward observers/spotters and rear security;
e) Deploy security forces in a strategic and defensive position;
f) Place road spikes or tire deflation system if available; and
g) Designate a recorder to ensure that the whole intervention
procedure is documented;
3) As much as possible, the area where the roadblock shall be
established must be properly lighted during nighttime with
noticeable signage;
4) Police car lights must be turned on at all times during the operation;
5) When the suspect’s vehicle stops, the procedures in flagging down
vehicles for possible involvement in the commission of a crime in
Rule 2.3a of this POP shall be followed.
6) Procedures when suspects open fire/engage the troops:
a) In the event that the occupants of the vehicle open fires on
the personnel manning the roadblock, the procedures in the
Force Continuum under Chapter 2 Section 2-4 of this POP
shall be applied;
b) Avoid panic firing;
c) Avoid collateral damage;
d) Account for the fatalities and give immediate medical
assistance to the injured; and
Chapter 3



43
e) Secure the crime scene and wait for the arrival of SOCO and
Investigator-on-case (IOC).
7) When the suspect/s surrender or are arrested, they must be
informed of the arresting officer’s identity, authority and the basis
of the arrest and apprised of their constitutional rights;
8) Fleeing Vehicles
If the motorist flees despite the repeated warnings the team shall:
a) Pursue the fleeing motorist and immediately update the
station TOC and adjacent units about the current situation;
b) Fleeing vehicles shall not be fired upon;
c) Inform the headquarters of the make or type, plate number
and color of the motor vehicle to be accosted including the
number of occupants and, if possible, their identity; and
d) Give mobile car’s location and the direction of the suspect’s
escape
9) After the police defensive roadblock operation, an after operations
report must be submitted.
2.6 Arrest
a. General Guidelines
1) All arrests should be made only on the basis of a valid warrant of
arrest issued by a judge, except in instances where the law allows
warrantless arrest.
2) No violence or unnecessary force shall be used in making an
arrest, and the person to be arrested shall not be subjected to any
restraint greater than what is necessary under the circumstances.
(The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 2).
Chapter 3



44
3) Arrests can be made on any day of the week and at any time of
the day or night (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule
113 sec. 6).
4) If the accused is already in detention, a return, together with
required documents, shall be made for any standing warrants of
arrest issued after the service.
5) A senator or member of the House of Representatives shall, in all
offenses punishable by not more than six years imprisonment, be
privileged from arrest while the congress is in session. No member
shall be questioned nor be held liable in any other place for any
speech or debate in the congress or in any committee thereof
(Const. (1987), art. VI sec. 11 (Phil.).
6) Diplomatic agents and couriers, under the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations (1961 p8), are not liable to any form of arrest
or detention.
b. Authority of the Arresting Officer when Making an Arrest
1) A police officer making a lawful arrest may verbally summon as
many persons as he/she deems necessary to assist him/her in
effecting the arrest (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure,
rule 113 sec. 10).
2) A police officer, in order to make an arrest with or without warrant,
may break into a building or enclosure where the person to be
arrested is or is reasonably believed to be in, if he is refused
admittance thereto, after announcing his/her authority and purpose
(The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 11).
3) Whenever a police officer has entered the building or enclosure to
make an arrest, he/she may break out therefrom, when necessary,
to liberate him/herself (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure,
rule 113 sec. 12).
4) If a person lawfully arrested escapes or is rescued, any person
may immediately pursue to retake him/her without a warrant at
any time and in any place within the Philippines (The Revised
Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 13).
Chapter 3



45
c. Duties of the Arresting Officer
1) In implementing the warrant of arrest, the arresting officers shall
use at least one BWC and one ARD, or a minimum of two devices,
or such number as may be necessary. In case of unavailability of
BWCs, the arresting officers shall file an ex-parte motion (Annex
“D”) before the court, requesting authority to use at least two ARDs
for justifiable reasons.
2) The BWC/ARD shall be used and activated upon arrival at the
place of arrest to capture and record the relevant incidents during
the execution of the warrant. The BWC/ARD shall be worn in a
conspicuous location and in a manner that maximizes the ability to
capture a recording of the arrest. It shall only be deactivated upon
conclusion of the arrest and delivery of the person/s arrested to
the nearest police station or jail. The same shall be observed in
cases of warrantless arrests, whenever BWCs/ARDs were used.
3) It shall be the duty of the police officer implementing the Warrant of
Arrest to deliver the arrested person without delay to the nearest
Police Station or jail (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure,
rule 113 sec. 3) to record the fact of the arrest;
4) At the time of the arrest, it shall be the duty of the arresting officer
to inform the person arrested of the cause of the arrest and the fact
that a warrant had been issued for his/her arrest. The arresting
officer need not have the warrant in his/her possession at the time
of the arrest but after the arrest, if the person arrested so requires,
the warrant shall be shown to him/her as soon as possible (The
Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 7);
5) When a woman is arrested, a policewoman shall conduct the
complete body search;
6) When a Child in Conflict with the Law (CICL) is arrested, he/she
shall be processed by the Women’s and Children’s Protection
Desks (WCPD) officer and shall immediately be separated from
other adult suspects. He/she must be turned over to the LSWDO
or other accredited NGOs within eight hours after apprehension;
Chapter 3



46
7) If a foreign national is arrested, the arresting officer through his/
her COP/Unit Commander, shall perform the following:
a) Simultaneously inform the Foreign Liaison Division (FLD),
Directorate for Intelligence (DI), PNP Command Center (PCC)
and the immediate higher office through Short Messaging
System (SMS) within one hour upon the arrest;
b) Submit a written report of the incident within eight hours to
the immediate higher office.
8) In case of arrest without a warrant, it shall be the duty of the arresting
officer to inform the person to be arrested of his/her identity,
authority and the basis of the arrest except when he/she flees or
forcibly resists before the arresting officer has the opportunity to
inform him/her or when the giving of such information will imperil
the arrest (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec.
8);
9) The person arrested, with or without warrant, shall be informed of
his/her constitutional right to remain silent and that any statement
he/she makes could be used against him/her. Also, that he/she has
the right to communicate with his/her lawyer or his/her immediate
family and the right to physical examination. It shall be the duty of
arresting officer to subject arrested person with or without warrant
to a medical examination prior to temporary detention;
10) A person arrested without a warrant shall be immediately brought
to the Police Station for investigation without unnecessary delay.
He/she shall be subjected to inquest proceedings within the time
prescribed in Article 125 of the Revised Penal Code (RPC);
11) No torture, force, violence, threat, intimidation, or any other means
which vitiate the free will shall be used against an arrested person.
The bringing of arrested persons to secret detention places,
solitary confinement and the like is prohibited;
12) The arresting officer shall ensure that the arrested person is free
from torture or physical abuse;
Chapter 3



47
13) If the person arrested without a warrant waives his/her right under
the provisions of Art 125 of the Revised Penal Code, the arresting
officer shall ensure that the former signs a waiver of detention in
the presence of his/her counsel of choice; and
14) If the person arrested waives his/her right against self-incrimination
and chooses to give his/her statement, the arresting officer shall
ensure that the waiver is made in writing and signed by the person
arrested in the presence of a counsel of his/her own choice or a
competent and independent counsel provided by the government.
d. Arrest with Warrant
1) Warrant of Arrest
The warrant of arrest is the written authority for the arresting officer
when making an arrest or taking of a person into custody in order that
he/she may be bound to answer for the commission of an offense. The
head of the office to whom the warrant of arrest has been delivered for
implementation shall cause the warrant to be implemented within ten
days from receipt. Within ten days after the expiration of such period, the
police officer to whom it was assigned for implementation shall make a
report to the judge who issued the warrant and in case of his/her failure
to implement the same, shall state the reasons thereof.
2) Procedures in Serving Warrant of Arrest
a) Verify the validity of the Warrant of Arrest;
b) In serving the warrant, the police officer should introduce
himself/herself and show proper identification;
c) The person/s arrested shall be notified as early as practicable,
that the arrest is being recorded with the BWC/ARD and that
the arrest is by virtue of the warrant;
d) Make a manifestation of authority against the person to be
arrested;
Chapter 3



48
e) If refused entry, the police officer may break into any
residence, office, building, and other structure where the
person to be arrested is in or is reasonably believed to be in,
after announcing his/her purpose;
f) The police officer need not have a copy of the warrant in
his/her possession at the time of the arrest. If the person
arrested so requires, the warrant shall be shown to the
arrested person as soon as possible;
g) Secure the person to be arrested and use handcuffs for the
protection of the arresting officer, other individuals or the
arrested person himself/herself;
h) Conduct thorough search for weapons and other illegal
materials on the person arrested and surroundings within
his/her immediate control;
i) Inform the person to be arrested of his/her rights under the
law (i.e. Miranda Warning and Anti-torture Warning);
j) No unnecessary force shall be used in making an arrest;
k) Confiscated evidence shall be properly documented with the
chain of custody of evidence duly and clearly established;
l) Bring the arrested person to the Police Station or office of the
arresting unit for documentation;
m) Make a Return of Warrant to the court of origin (Annex “E”);
n) Deliver the arrested person to the designated jail/prison
facility immediately upon the receipt of the commitment order
from the court; and
o) In case of failure to execute the warrant of arrest, the officer
to whom it was assigned for execution shall, within 30 days
from such assignment, file a report stating the reasons for
such failure.
Chapter 3



Chapter 3 49
e. Arrests without a Warrant
1) A peace officer or a private person may, without a warrant, arrest
a person:
a) When, in his/her presence, the person to be arrested has
committed, is actually committing, or is attempting to commit
an offense;
b) When an offense has just been committed and he/she has
probable cause to believe, based on personal knowledge of
facts or circumstances, that the person to be arrested has
committed it;
c) When the person to be arrested is a prisoner who has
escaped from a penal establishment or place where he/she
is serving final judgment or temporarily confined while his/
her case is pending, or has escaped while being transferred
from one confinement area to another (The Revised Rules of
Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 5);
d) Where the accused released on bail attempts to leave the
country without court permission;
e) Violation of conditional pardon, punishable under Article 159
of the Revised Penal Code as a case of evasion of service
of sentence; and
f) Arrest following a Deportation Proceeding by the Immigration
Commissioner against illegal and undesirable aliens.
2) Effecting Warrantless Arrest
a) Make use and activate the BWC/ARD if available and
practicable. Notify the person/s arrested, as early as
practicable, that the arrest is being recorded with the BWC/
ARD;
b) Freeze or restrain the suspect/s;



50
c) Make proper introduction as to identity and authority to arrest;
d) Inform the arrested person of the circumstances of his/
her arrest and recite the Miranda Warning and Anti-torture
Warning to him/her;
e) Secure the person to be arrested and use handcuffs for the
protection of the arresting officer, other individuals or the
arrested person him/herself;
f) Conduct thorough search for weapons and other illegal
materials on the person arrested and surroundings within
his/her immediate control;
g) Confiscated evidence shall be properly documented with the
chain of custody of evidence duly and clearly established;
h) No unnecessary force shall be used in making an arrest; and
i) Bring the arrested person to the police station for further
investigation and disposition.
f. Physical/Medical Examination of Arrested Person/Suspect. Before
detention, the person arrested must be physically/medically examined
by a medical doctor preferably of his/her own choice. If the person
arrested is a female, she shall be attended to preferably by a female
medical doctor.
g. Booking of Arrested Suspect. Booking of arrested suspects shall be
undertaken to record and document the information surrounding the
arrest of the suspect.
The following are the procedures, duties and responsibilities of
personnel during the booking of arrested suspects:
1) Arresting Officer (AO) shall:
a) Immediately bring the suspect/s to the police station and
present him/her to the Desk Officer (DO) for recording in the
police blotter the circumstances of the arrest as well as his/
her identity;
Chapter 3



51
b) Conduct a more thorough body search of the suspect/s.
When women and/or minors are among those arrested, the
duty WCPD officer shall do the thorough body search. Any
deadly weapon and illegal items found and seized shall also
be recorded in the blotter. The AO shall indicate his/her rank
and name and duly sign in the blotter entry;
c) Request the DO to prepare the “Request for Medical
Examination of the Suspect” Form (Annex “F”);
d) Bring/escort the suspects to the government hospital referred
to in the request form for the examination of the suspects;
e) After the physical/medical examination of the suspects, bring
them back to the police station and turn them over, with the
results of the examination, to the Duty Investigator (DI); and;
f) Obtain the “Arrest and Booking Form” (Annex “G”) and refer
it to the DI so that they will diligently accomplish it. The copy
of the Arrest and Booking Form shall form part of the case
folder and be kept at the Investigation Section at the police
station;
g) Prepare and file the corresponding report to the judge on the
execution of the warrant. The report shall be accompanied
by affidavits of the PNP personnel whose BWCs/ARDs were
used (Annex “H”), stating the following:
(1) The date, time, and place of the recording;
(2) The manner by which the recording was taken and
stored, and when applicable, the fact of unavailability of
BWCs and that a resort to ARDs was necessary, and the
circumstances detailing the non-activation, interruption,
or sudden termination of the recording;
(3) The fact that persons of the recording were notified of
the use of BWCs/ARDs;
Chapter 3



52
(4) The date, time, place and other circumstances
surrounding the first instance of retrieval or download
of the recording from the cameras;
(5) The names and positions of the persons who had
possession of and access to the recordings, including
details of such access, from the time of their taking until
their deposit with the court;
(6) The fact of redaction of personal identifiers appearing
in the recording whenever applicable, the special
circumstances justifying such redaction, and the details
redacted;
(7) Whenever applicable, a certification that both
unredacted and redacted files containing the recordings
are submitted to the court;
(8) The names and positions of the officers who will be
delivering the recordings to the court;
(9) Reasonable ground in case of noncompliance with
any of the requirements on the use of BWCs/ARDs,
including all acts undertaken showing genuine and
sufficient efforts exerted to ensure compliance thereof.
2) Desk Officer (DO) shall:
a) Log and record the details of the arrest made and assign
a blotter entry number. It shall include the name of the
arresting officer and the five “W”s and one “H” (Who, What,
Where, When, Why and How) as well as the name of the
government hospital to where the suspect/s will be referred
to for physical/medical examination; and
b) Prepare or accomplish the “Medical Examination of the
Suspects Request Form” (Annex “F”) to be signed by the
OD. In his/her absence, the DO may sign the request form
himself/herself.
Chapter 3



53
3) Duty Investigator (DI) shall:
a) Diligently accomplish the “Arrest and Booking Form” (Annex
“G”) and “Medical Examination Result Sheet” (Annex “I”) with
the AO and ensure that a copy of the results of the physical/
medical examination is attached;
b) Conduct record check to determine if the arrested suspect/s
have previous or existing cases and/or standing warrant of
arrest;
c) Ensure that Mug Shots of the suspects are taken in four
different methods while standing straight in front of the
prescribed booking mug shot backdrop and holding the
prescribed identification board. The 4R mug shots shall be
attached or printed in the “Booking Mug Shots” Form (Annex
“J”);
d) While completing the necessary documents for inquest,
the arrested suspect shall be temporarily turned-over to
the jailer/custodial officer and covered by a “Turn-over of
Arrested Suspect/s” Form (Annex “K”) and a “Jailer’s Receipt
of Suspects” Form (Annex “L”);
e) All personal valuables of the suspect that are not allowed
to be brought inside the custodial facility shall be collected
by the Investigator and turned-over to the station Evidence/
Property Custodian. The Investigator shall prepare a
“Suspects Property Receipt” Form (Annex “M”);
f) Ensure that the suspects’ fingerprints and tenprints are taken
only by a trained personnel using both the “Arrest and Booking
Form” (Annex “G”) and the standard “Tenprint Card” PNPCL
Form No 452-038 (Annex “N”) to ensure that this will be
readable by the Automated Fingerprint identification System
(AFIS). The tenprint card is considered as an integral part of
the booking form;
g) Inform the Desk Officer and personnel in charge of the Next
Generation Investigation Systems (NGIS) of the status of the
Chapter 3



54
case and the suspect so that updates will be entered in the
police blotter and the NGIS;
h) Prepare the necessary documents such as but not limited to:
affidavit of complaint; affidavit of witness; booking and arrest
report; photo copy of recovered evidence if any; and a letter
of case referral to the Prosecutor’s Office that should be
reviewed and signed by the COP/Station/Unit Commander;
and
i) Submit to the prosecutor conducting the inquest proceedings,
the BWC/ARD recordings along with the affidavit of arrest, in
case of warrantless arrests.
4) The PNP personnel who wore the BWC/ARD shall
a) Turn-over to the Data Custodian all recordings for downloading
from the BWC/ARD after the conduct of arrest; and
b) Execute the affidavit of arrest, in coordination with the DI and
other arresting officers, if any.
5) The Data Custodian (DC) shall:
a) Receive, have custody, download within 24 hours from the
recording, store to an external media storage device and
encrypt all recordings of BWCs/ARDs in the conduct of arrest
and simultaneously deposit the same in a sealed package
with the issuing court. In case of warrantless arrests, the
DC shall turn-over the sealed package to the DI who will be
responsible to submit the same to the inquest prosecutor. This
shall include recordings captured by media representatives
relative to Section 21 of RA 9165, as amended;
b) Retain a back-up copy for justifiable reasons for a period not
exceeding 15 days, only with leave of court;
c) Ensure the security, confidentiality and integrity of the
recordings;
Chapter 3



55
d) Redact sensitive information, images and other personal
identifiers from the recordings, such as in cases involving
minors, sexual offenses, or domestic violence. Submit all
redacted and unredacted file/s to the court;
e) Ensure that no tampering is done during the downloading
process. Consequently, allow the subjects of the recordings
or their counsels to witness the downloading of the recordings
from the BWCs/ARDs prior to safekeeping.
f) Preserve the metadata contained in the BWC/ARD
recordings;
g) Limit viewing access of the footage to:
(1) Any person who is a subject of the recording or his/her
counsel;
(2) The parent, guardian, or counsel of any minor who is a
subject of the recording;
(3) The spouse, next of kin, or legally authorized designee
of a deceased subject of the recording, or his/her
counsel; and
(4) PNP personnel whose camera captured the recording
belongs;
h) Provide a copy of the recording to the persons enumerated in
aforementioned item g) (1) to (3) should the person subject of
the recording consented to its use in a court proceeding, and
if the request is done within five days from data downloading.
2.7 Search and Seizure
a. Requisites for the Issuance of Search Warrant.
A search warrant shall be issued only upon probable cause in
connection with one specific offense to be determined personally by the
judge after examination under oath or affirmation of the complainant and
the witnesses presented. The search warrant shall particularly describe the
Chapter 3



56
place to be searched and the things to be seized which may be anywhere in
the Philippines. It includes the order requiring the use of at least one BWC
and one ARD, or a minimum of two devices, or such number as may be
necessary to capture and record the relevant incidents during its execution.
1) The following properties may be the objects of a search warrant:
a) Properties which are the subject of the offense;
b) Stolen, embezzled proceeds, or fruits of the offense; and
c) Objects including weapons, equipment, and other items
used or intended to be used as the means of committing an
offense.
2) Objects that are illegal per se, even if not particularly described in
the search warrant, may be seized under the plain view doctrine.
b. Validity of Search Warrant
1) The warrant shall be valid for ten days from date of issuance and
may be served at any day within the said period. Thereafter, it
shall be void.
2) If, in the implementation of the search warrant, its object or purpose
cannot be accomplished in one day, the search shall be continued
without let up even if it exceeds one day or more until completed,
provided it is still within the ten-day validity period of the search
warrant.
3) If the object or purpose of the search warrant cannot be
accomplished within the ten-day validity period, the responsible
police officer conducting the search must file, before the issuing
court, an application for the extension of the validity period of said
search warrant.
c. Time of Search
The warrant should be served during daytime, unless there is a provision
in the warrant allowing service at any time of the day or night.
Chapter 3



57
d. Applications for Search Warrant
All approved applications shall be recorded in a logbook, duly
maintained for the purpose, indicating the name of the applicant, name of
the respondent, nature of the offense, and date of the application as required
in the “Application for Search Warrant”, “Joint Affidavit”, and Deposition of
Witness (Annexes “O”, “O-1” and “O-2”).
1) Contents of the Application:
All applications for Search Warrant shall be approved for filing by
the Chief of Office.
The application shall indicate the following data:
a) Office applying for the Search Warrant;
b) Name of officer-applicant;
c) Name of the subject, if known;
d) Exact address/place(s) to be searched;
e) Specific statement of things/articles to be seized; and
f) Sketch and/or Picture, if available, of the place to be searched.
g) The availability or unavailability of BWCs to be used in the
execution of the warrant. In case of unavailability, request for
authority to use ARDs.
e. Authority of Police Officers when Conducting Search
The authority of the police officer in the conduct of search generally
emanates from the Search Warrant issued by the court. In warrantless
searches, there should always be a prior valid arrest.
In the conduct of search, if after giving notice of his/her purpose and
authority, the police officer is refused admittance to the place of search, he
may break open any outer or inner door or window or any part of a house or
Chapter 3



58
anything therein to implement the warrant or liberate himself/herself or any
person lawfully aiding him/her when unlawfully detained therein.
f. Use of BWC During the Search
1) At least one BWC and one ARD or such number as may be
necessary to capture and record the relevant incidents during its
execution shall be worn by members of the searching team. If
BWCs are not available, at least two ARDs must be used.
2) The member of the searching team with the device shall ensure
that they are worn in a conspicuous location and in a manner that
maximizes their ability to capture a recording of the search.
3) The BWCs/ARDs shall be activated upon arrival at the place of
search, and shall not be deactivated until the search has been
fully concluded and the searching team have left the premises and
returned to the police station.
g. Notification During the Search. When conducting search by virtue of a
warrant, the PNP personnel wearing the BWC/ARD shall, as early as
practicable, notify the lawful occupants of the premises to be searched
that the execution of the SW is being recorded and that the conduct of
search is pursuant to a warrant issued by the court.
h. Prohibited Acts in the Conduct of Search by Virtue of a Search Warrant
1) Houses, rooms, or other premises shall not be searched except
in the presence of the lawful occupant thereof or any member of
his/her family or, in the absence of the latter, in the presence of
two witnesses of sufficient age and discretion residing in the same
locality.
2) Lawful personal properties, papers, and other valuables not
specifically indicated or particularly described in the search warrant
shall not be taken.
i. Inventory and Delivery of Property Seized
1) The police officer who confiscates property under the warrant shall
issue a detailed receipt of property seized to the lawful occupant
Chapter 3



59
of the premises. In the absence of such occupant, the detailed
receipt shall be left in the place in which he/she found the seized
property in the presence of at least two witnesses of sufficient age
and discretion residing in the same locality (The Revised Rules of
Criminal Procedure, rule 126 sec. 11);
2) The receipt shall likewise include items seized under the Plain
View Doctrine;
3) The police officer must then leave a duplicate detailed receipt with
any barangay official having jurisdiction over the place searched
following the “Receipt for Property Seized” and “Certification of
Orderly Search” (Annexes “P” and “P-1”); and
4) The police officer must make a return of the search warrant and
forthwith deliver the property seized to the judge who issued the
warrant, together with an inventory thereof, duly verified under oath
following the forms on “Compliance/Return of Search Warrant”
and “Verification” (Annexes “Q” and “Q-1”).
j. Downloading of Data from the BWC/ARD:
1) After the conduct of search, all recordings from the BWC/ARD
shall be turned-over to the Data Custodian who shall undertake
the following:
a) Receive, have custody, download within 24 hours from the
recording, store to an external media storage device and
encrypt all recordings of BWCs/ARDs in the conduct of
search and simultaneously deposit the same in a sealed
package with the issuing court. This shall include recordings
captured by media representatives relative to Section 21 of
RA 9165, as amended;
b) Ensure the security, confidentiality and integrity of the
recordings;
c) Redact sensitive information, images and other personal
identifiers from the recordings, such as in cases involving
minors, sexual offenses, or domestic violence. Submit all
redacted and unredacted file/s to the court;
Chapter 3



60
d) Ensure that no tampering is done during the downloading
process. Consequently, allow the subjects of the recordings
or their counsels to witness the downloading of the recordings
from the BWCs/ARDs prior to safekeeping;
e) Preserve the metadata contained in the BWC/ARD
recordings;
f) Limit viewing access of the footage to:
(1) Any person who is a subject of the recording or his/her
counsel;
(2) The parent, guardian, or counsel of any minor who is a
subject of the recording;
(3) The spouse, next of kin, or legally authorized designee
of a deceased subject of the recording, or his/her
counsel; and
(4) PNP personnel whose camera captured the recording
belongs;
g) Provide a copy of the recording to the persons enumerated
in items f) (1) to (3) above should the person subject of the
recording consented to its use in a court proceeding, and if
the request is done within five days from data downloading.
k. Affidavit of Search and Submission of Recordings to Court
1) Upon filing of the Return, all recordings from the BWCs/ARDs
used during the execution of the SW shall be stored in an external
media storage device and simultaneously deposited in a sealed
package with the issuing court.
2) In case of redaction of personal identifiers in the recordings, both
the redacted and unredacted files shall be submitted to the court.
3) The Return shall be accompanied by affidavits of the searching
team members whose BWCs/ARDs were used to capture the
recordings, and shall state the following:
Chapter 3



61
a) The date, time, and place of the recording;
b) The manner by which the recording was taken and stored,
and when applicable, the fact of unavailability of BWCs and
that a resort to ARDs was necessary, and the circumstances
detailing the non-activation, interruption, or sudden
termination of the recording;
c) The fact that persons of the recording were notified of the
use of BWCs/ARDs;
d) The date, time, place and other circumstances surrounding
the first instance of retrieval or download of the recording
from the cameras;
e) The names and positions of the persons who had possession
of and access to the recordings, including details of such
access, from the time of their taking until their deposit with
the court;
f) The fact of redaction of personal identifiers appearing in the
recording whenever applicable, the special circumstances
justifying such redaction, and the details redacted;
g) Whenever applicable, a certification that both unredacted
and redacted files containing the recordings are submitted
to the court;
h) The names and positions of the officers who will be delivering
the recordings to the court;
i) Reasonable ground in case of noncompliance with any of the
requirements on the use of BWCs/ARDs, including all acts
undertaken showing genuine and sufficient efforts exerted to
ensure compliance thereof.
4) In case of death, physical disability, resignation, or separation/
dismissal of the PNP personnel from the service whose BWCs/
ARDs were used in the execution of the warrant, any member of
the arresting/searching team shall make the affidavit.
Chapter 3



62
5) When death results from the execution of search warrant, an
incident report detailing the search, the reasons why such death
occurred, the result of related inquest proceedings, if any –
including possibly those against the PNP personnel causing the
death – together with other relevant documents, shall likewise be
submitted.
l. Valid Search and Seizures Without Search Warrant
1) Search Made Incidental to a Valid Arrest. A person lawfully arrested
may be searched for dangerous weapons or anything which may
be used, or which may constitute proof in the commission of an
offense, without a search warrant (The Revised Rules of Criminal
Procedure, rule 126 sec. 13). The warrantless search and seizure
as an incident to a lawful arrest may extend beyond the person of
the arrested to include the premises or surroundings under his/her
immediate control.
2) Search of Moving Vehicles. If the police officers who will conduct
the search have reasonable or probable cause to believe, before
the search, that either the motorist is a law offender or they will find
the instrumentality or evidence pertaining to a crime in the vehicle
to be searched, the vehicle may be stopped and subjected to an
extensive search.
3) Seizure Of Evidence in Plain View. Any object in the plain
view is subject to seizure and may be introduced as evidence.
Requirements under the Plain View Doctrine are:
a) The police officer must have prior justification for an intrusion
or, otherwise, must be in a position from which he/she can
view a particular area;
b) The discovery of the evidence in plain view is unintentional;
and
c) It is immediately apparent to the police officer that the item
he/she observes may be evidence of a crime, contraband, or
is a valid subject of seizure.
Chapter 3



63
4) When there is a Waiver of Right or there is Consented Search.
To constitute a waiver of this constitutional right, it must appear,
first, that the right exists; second, that the person involved had
knowledge, either actual or constructive, of the existence of such
right; that said person had an actual intention to relinquish the right
(“G.R. No. L-45950”, 1938).
5) Searches Under Stop and Frisk Rule. The police officer has the
right to stop a citizen, interrogate him/her, and pat him/her for
weapons whenever he/she has genuine reason to believe, based
on experiences and the particular circumstances that a criminal
activity may be afoot.
6) Emergency and Exigent Circumstances. A search warrant could be
validly dispensed with in cases of exigent and emergency situation,
and the police officers have reasonable grounds to believe that a
crime is being committed, and they have no opportunity to apply for
a search warrant from the courts because the latter were closed.
2.8 Rules on Anti-Illegal Drugs Operations
a. General Policy and Guidelines:
1) The Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency (PDEA) is mandated
by law to carry out the provisions of Comprehensive Dangerous
Drugs Act of 2002 (RA 9165), as amended by RA 10640. It serves
as the implementing arm of the Dangerous Drugs Board (DDB),
and responsible for the efficient and effective enforcement of all
the provisions of the aforementioned act on any dangerous drug
and/or controlled precursor and essential chemicals (CPECs).
2) Only PNP Drug Enforcement Group Special Operation Units
(PDEG SOUs) and Drug Enforcement Units (DEUs) of LPUs
are authorized to conduct Anti-Illegal Drug Operations and to
coordinate with PDEA.
3) All other operating units are only allowed as support in the conduct
of joint operations with PDEG and/or the concerned DEUs.
4) The PNP is not prevented from conducting warrantless arrests in
relation to violations of RA 9165 as amended under Section 5,
Chapter 3



64
Rule 113, and search incidental to a lawful arrest under Section
13, Rule 126 of the Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure.
5) Information concerning parcels containing dangerous drugs,
CPECs and drug paraphernalia shall be reported to PDEA,
through the Inter-Agency Drug Interdiction Task Group. The PNP
shall provide the necessary support and assistance to the task
group, if required.
b. Coordination Requirements
1) Prior to the conduct of all anti-illegal drug operations, PNP antidrug units shall coordinate with PDEA Regional Operation Center
(ROC), and the LPU having jurisdiction over the area of operation.
Coordination shall be made personally with PDEA ROC to secure
a Certificate of Coordination (COC);
2) PDEA anti-illegal drug operations shall be coordinated with the
concerned LPU, prior the conduct of operation. The PDEA’s PreOperation Report and Coordination Form (Annexes “R” and “S”)
shall be received and stamped by the Duty Officer of the LPU
indicating his/her name, signature, time and day of coordination;
3) All operating units shall furnish the concerned LPU a copy of the
After-Operation Report immediately after the termination of every
anti-illegal drug operation;
4) There shall only be one COC for every anti-illegal drug operation
following the “One-Jurisdiction, One-Operation” rule, wherein
only one anti-illegal drug operation against a particular suspect/s
covering a specific area at a given time shall be conducted;
5) Copies of reports pertaining to other police operations that resulted
in the arrest of a person/s and/or seizure/confiscation of dangerous
drugs, CPECs and drug paraphernalia shall be furnished to PDEA
for record purposes;
6) The PDEG SOUs may conduct anti-illegal drug operations
nationwide, even in areas where there is an ongoing anti-illegal
drug operation, provided that the area of operation is specifically
Chapter 3



65
identified, and details shall be provided in the Pre-Operation
Report and a Coordination Form;
7) In instances that the operating PDEG SOUs and DEUs shall move
to another area not mentioned in the COC, a new Pre-Operation
Report and Coordination Form shall be submitted to PDEA. When
personal coordination cannot be made, an online submission
of requirement for application for issuance of COC is permitted.
Only the control number shall be submitted after the operation in
exchange for the original COC, provided that the principle of “OneJurisdiction, One-Operation” rule shall apply; and
8) The PNP shall at all times submit to PDEA ROC copies of
operational reports such as Spot Report, Negative Operation
Report and Progress Report after the conduct of any anti-illegal
drug operation.
c. Handling, Custody and Disposition of Drug and Non-Drug Evidence
(DOJ, 2020).
During the handling, custody and disposition of evidence, the provisions
of Section 21, R.A. No. 9165 and its IRR as amended by R.A. No. 10640
shall be strictly observed. Noncompliance, under justifiable grounds, with
the requirements of Section 21 (1) of R.A. no. 9165, as amended, shall not
render void, and invalid such seizures and custody over the items provided
the integrity and the evidentiary value of the seized items are properly
preserved by the apprehending officer/team. Any justification or explanation
in cases of noncompliance with the said requirements, shall be clearly
stated in the sworn statements/affidavits of the apprehending arresting/
seizing officers, as well as the steps taken to preserve the integrity and
evidentiary value of the seized/confiscated items. Photographs of pieces of
evidence must be taken immediately upon discovery of such, including the
process of recording the inventory in the presence of required witnesses.
The seizing officer must mark all the evidence seized with his/her initials
and signature as well as the date when the evidence was found/recovered
or seized, numbered consecutively.
1) Drug Evidence
a) Upon seizure or confiscation of dangerous drugs or CPECs,
laboratory equipment, apparatus and paraphernalia, the
Chapter 3



66
operating unit’s seizing officer/inventory officer must conduct
the photographing, marking and physical inventory in the
place of operation in the presence of:
(1) The suspect/s or the person/s from whom such items
were confiscated and/or seized or his/ her representative
or counsel;
(2) An elected public official; and
(3) Representative from the National Prosecution Service
(NPS) or media, who shall affix their signatures and
who shall be given copies of the inventory. The Chain of
Custody Form for Drug Evidence, Non-Drug Evidence
and for Laboratory (Annex “T”, “U” and “V”), whichever
is applicable, shall also be accomplished together with
the Certificate of Inventory of Seized Items (Annex “W”).
b) For seized or recovered drugs covered by search warrants,
the photographing, marking and inventory must be done in
the place where the search warrant was served.
c) For warrantless seizures like buy-bust operations, the
photographing, markings, and physical inventory must be
done at the place of apprehension, unless for justifiable
reasons, the photographing, markings, and physical inventory
may be made at the nearest police station or office of the
apprehending officer or team, ensuring that the integrity
and evidentiary value of the seized items remain intact and
preserved. Such justification or explanation as well as the
steps taken to preserve the integrity and evidentiary value of
the seized/confiscated items shall be clearly stated in a sworn
affidavit of justification/explanation of the apprehending/
seizing officers.
d) In cases when the execution of search warrant is preceded
by warrantless seizures, the photographing, marking, and
inventory of the items recovered from the search warrant
shall be performed distinctly and separately from the
photographing, marking, and inventory of the items seized
from warrantless seizures.
Chapter 3



67
e) In case of seizure of plant sources at the plantation site,
where it is not physically possible to count or weigh as a
complete entity, the seizing officer shall estimate its count
or gross weight, as the case may be. If it is safe and
practicable, the photographing, marking and inventory of the
seized plant sources may be performed at the plantation site.
Representative samples of prescribed quantity pursuant to
DDB Board Regulation No. 1, series of 2002, as amended,
and/or DDB Board Regulation No. 1, series of 2007, as
amended, shall be taken from the site after the seizure for
laboratory examination, and retained for presentation as
the corpus delicti of the seized/confiscated plant sources
following the chain of custody of evidence.
f) Whenever necessary, the dangerous drugs and/or CPECs
seized shall be properly packed, sealed and marked with
the initials and signature of the seizing officer as well as the
date when the evidence was found/recovered or seized,
numbered consecutively
g) Within the same period, the seizing or inventory officer shall
prepare an Inventory Sheet which shall include but not limited
to the following:
(1) Time, date and place of occurrence/seizure.
(2) Identity of person/s arrested.
(3) Identity of the seizing officer and all persons who
witnessed the marking and inventory;
(4) Type of operation (e.g. warrantless seizure, buy-bust,
etc.)
(5) Description of the vehicle, vessel, place or person
searched from where/whom the substance was found.
(6) Description of packaging, seals and other identifying
marks.
(7) Quantity of the seized items.
Chapter 3



68
(8) Description of the substance found
h) As far as practicable, all seized dangerous drugs and/or
CPECs shall be immediately submitted to the PNP Crime
Laboratory (CL) for examination and proper disposition.
i) Upon submission of the drug evidence to the PNP CL for
examination, all the phases of turn-over of evidence must
have corresponding receipts to show continuance of chain
of custody.
2) Non-Drug Evidence (to be covered in a separate inventory sheet
and chain of custody form)
a) The following pieces of non-drug evidence shall be
photographed, marked and inventoried:
(1) Buy-bust/marked money, if applicable.
(2) For motor vehicles and other forms of transportation
(e.g. vessel/banca, bicycle, airplane): plate number/
conduction sticker number, color, model, make and
type and description.
(3) For firearms: serial number, model, make and caliber,
kind and type.
(4) For explosives (after observing safety protocol from
EOD unit): description and type.
(5) For other deadly weapons (e.g. knives): description,
measurement, quantity.
(6) For smaller pieces of evidence (e.g. ammunition):
pertinent information such as quality, quantity and place
where it was seized/recovered.
b) For digital evidence such as computers, cell phones, laptops,
other similar gadgets, and storage peripherals (e.g. flash
drives, cd) the same shall likewise be photographed, marked
and inventoried;
Chapter 3



69
c) For documentary evidence, same procedure regarding
photographs, marking, and inventory shall be followed; and
d) For motor vehicles, vessel/banca, firearms and digital
evidence, the same are subject to verification and processing
by the LTO, Firearms and Explosive Division (FED) and AntiCybercrime Group (ACG), and MG as the case may be.
3) Chain of Custody
a) To ensure the preservation of the integrity and identity of the
drug evidence, the chain of custody form shall indicate:
(1) The time and place of the search;
(2) The names of the officers who marked, inventoried and
sealed the seized items;
(3) Location of the evidence at the time it was found. If
the same was seized from an individual, it should note
exactly where on the person the evidence was found
(e.g. right front pocket);
(4) Type of operation for which the evidence was obtained
(e.g. evidence of a sale, implementation of search
warrant);
(5) Item numbers of the seized items in numerical sequence
consistent with the inventory sheet;
(6) Detailed description of the article at the time it was
seized.
(7) Names of officers who took custody and in what capacity
they received the evidence from one officer to another
within the chain; and
(8) Time and date every time the transfer of custody of the
same evidence were made in the course of safekeeping
until submitted to laboratory personnel for forensic
laboratory examination and presentation in court.
Chapter 3



70
b) The receipt of evidence must be acknowledged by all officers
receiving the evidence, whether in the same or a separate
document. Such receipt shall form part of the case folder of
the transmitting unit.
c) The evidence custodian, when applicable, must maintain a
logbook that contains information on:
(1) The person who turned in the evidence for safekeeping;
(2) The date and time thereof;
(3) The person who received it;
(4) The person who requested the same for whatever
purpose, who shall affix his/her name, signature, date
and time in the logbook.
When a piece of evidence is turned in, the custodian
should check the identification mark on the piece of evidence
to ensure that it is the same item and determine that the
item is in the same condition as when it was discovered. Any
change in the physical appearance of the evidence should
be noted and recorded.
2.9 Rules on Anti-Kidnapping Operations. The Anti-Kidnapping Group
(AKG) is the PNP’s lead unit in the conduct of anti-kidnapping operations in close
coordination with the LPU, other law enforcement agencies and the community
(Annex “X”).
a. Types of Kidnapping
1) Kidnapping by Organized Crime Group (OCG)/Criminal Group
(CG)
2) Kidnapping by Terrorists Groups (TG)
3) Kidnapping by Other Individuals
Chapter 3



71
b. Concept of Operation
Upon receipt of the kidnapping incident report at the police station, the
Desk Officer shall record the same in the blotter book. The COP and the
investigator shall immediately make an initial assessment of the reported
incident.
If the initial assessment has been confirmed that it is indeed a kidnapping
incident, the case shall be referred to the AKG, otherwise, the incident shall
be handled by the concerned LPU.
AKG will form an evaluation team composed of members of the quad
staff and duty officer of the day. They will assess and evaluate the complaint
to determine the appropriate operational response.
1) Kidnapping by Organized Crime Group/Criminal Group
a) If it is assessed as a kidnapping incident by OCGs/CG, AKG
will immediately activate the Anti-Kidnapping Action Team
(AKAT) which will handle the investigation, negotiation,
operation and intelligence aspect of the case.
b) The AKAT shall be supported by the concerned LPU and
other units.
c) The AKAT will only be deactivated when the victim is rescued
and a case is filed.
2) Kidnapping by Terrorists Groups
a) If the case is assessed as a kidnapping perpetrated by TGs,
AKG will request for the activation of the Critical Incident
Management Task Group (CIMTG). In case the Joint PNPAFP Task force or Crisis Management Committee (CMC),
as the case maybe, is activated the PNP shall provide full
support and cooperation.
b) If the incident happens in Mindanao involving local TGs, the
Special Task Force (STF) will be activated with the Deputy
Director of the concerned DIPO as the STF head. The STF
Chapter 3



72
shall serve as the primary intelligence and operational arm of
the PNP against KFR groups operating in Mindanao. It shall
establish coordinative line with the CMC.
3) Kidnapping by Other Individuals
a) If the alleged kidnapping incident, which is not within the
AKG’s mandate, is perpetrated by other individuals, the
concerned LPU shall take the appropriate operational
response. Otherwise, the AKG shall take cognizance of the
incident and handle it accordingly.
b) If the kidnapping incident involves a foreign national as
victim, the following shall be undertaken:
(1) By Local Police Unit:
(a) Determine the nationality and other personal
circumstances of the foreign kidnapped victim;
(b) Establish the identity and the relationship of the
reportee to the kidnapped victim;
(c) Notify the Bureau of Immigration (BI) and his/her
embassy/consulate office, as the case maybe, and
request said office to provide assistance to their
citizen like interpreters for non-English speaking
complainants, consular assistance etc; and
(d) Make a thorough assessment and determine if the
complaint falls under the category of a Kidnapfor-Ransom (KFR) case and refer it to the AKG if
validated;
(2) By AKG:
(a) Record all complaints referred by other PNP units,
Office of the CPNP and other law enforcement
agencies at the complaint section. The complaint
will be attended by the Initial Assessment Team;
Chapter 3



73
(b) Require the complainant to show proof of identity
during the initial assessment and properly record
the documents presented;
(c) Assist the complainant to secure the required
documents from his/her embassy if the required
documents are missing; and
(d) Inform the embassy of the victim and request their
assistance.
2.10 Cybercrime and Cyber-Related Incident Response Operations
a. Cybercrime Response. Cybercrime Response is the actual police
intervention in a cybercrime or cyber-related incident where the
acquisition of matters of evidentiary value is traceable within the
computer’s hardware, software and its network.
b. Guidelines in Responding to Cybercrime and Cyber-Related Incidents
1) When responding to a cybercrime incident, or to a crime scene
where Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
equipment (e.g computers, digital storage devices and other
electronic devices or equipment) are present, it is imperative for
the First Responder (FR) to protect and preserve the crime scene
and seek the assistance of the station IOC to identify potential
evidence such as the following:
a) Contraband or fruits of a crime;
b) Tools used for the commission of the crime; and/or
c) Other items that may be used in the commission of the crime.
2) The FR shall immediately coordinate with the nearest ACG office,
through the station TOC or the IOC, for assistance. Upon arrival of
the ACG personnel, they shall immediately conduct the “bag and
tag” procedure on the digital evidence and turn over to the IOC.
3) The concerned investigating unit shall secure and submit a court
Chapter 3



74
order and necessary legal requirements for the ACG to conduct
digital forensic examination that is in accordance with the rule on
cybercrime warrants. The evidence seized shall then be subjected
to digital forensic examination by the PNP ACG. The result of
the forensic examination, as well as the testimony of the forensic
expert, shall be made available during the trial.
c. Preservation of Seized Computer
Upon determination of how the computer was utilized in the commission
of the crime, and once the legal requirements have been complied with, the
following are the guidelines in the preservation of the seized computer:
1) Secure the Scene
a) Officer’s safety is always paramount.
b) Preserve the area for potential fingerprints.
c) Immediately restrict access to the computer.
d) Disable the internet connection to restrict remote access to
the computer
2) Secure the computer as evidence
a) If the computer is “OFF”, do not turn it “ON”.
b) If the computer is “ON”, do not turn it “OFF”, nor touch its
mouse or its keyboard.
3) For stand-alone connection or single area connection computers
(non-networked)
a) Consult a Digital Forensic Examiner.
b) If a Digital Forensic Examiner is not available, the station
IOC shall perform the following:
(1) Photograph screen and disconnect all power sources
and plugs including those at the back of the computer;
Chapter 3



75
(2) Cover or put a tape over each drive slot;
(3) Photograph (or make a diagram) and label parts located
at the back of the computer including its connections;
(4) Label all connectors and cable end to allow reassembly
as needed (Example: “Socket” marked “A” and the
“cable End” also marked “A”);
(5) If transport is required, pack the components as “fragile
cargo” prior to transport;
(6) Keep it away from magnets, radio transmitters, and
from other hostile environment; and
(7) Ensure that only the Digital Forensic Examiner conducts
the search for any evidence contained in the computer
hardware;
4) For Networked Computers (or business computers)
a) Consult a Digital Forensic Examiner for assistance.
b) Do not immediately pull the plug to prevent the following:
(1) Severe damage to the system;
(2) Disrupting the legitimate business; and
(3) Possible liability of the police officers.
5) For Ransomware or Malware Attack on a Computer
a) Consult a computer specialist for assistance;
b) Immediately disconnect the computer from the network to
avoid the spread of malware to other computers on the same
network; and
c) Do not immediately pull the plug and wait for the computer
specialist to arrive.
Chapter 3



76
d. Guidelines in the Treatment of Other Electronic Data Storage Devices
The IOC should understand that other electronic devices may contain
viable evidence associated with the crime. The IOC must ensure that the
device should not be accessed unless a warrant has been issued.
e. Preservation of Seized Mobile Communication Devices
Upon determination of how the mobile communication device was
utilized in the commission of the crime the following are the guidelines to be
followed:
1) If the device is turned “ON”, do not turn it “OFF” as it could activate
lockout feature
a) Take a photograph of the screen display and write down all
information therein;
b) If possible, turn on airplane/flight mode or use a signal blocking
container, if available, and record the steps undertaken;
c) If the device is locked, do not attempt to unlock it; and
d) Bring the power supply cord of the seized device found at
the scene.
2) If the device is TURNED “OFF”, leave it “OFF” AS IT could alter
evidence in the device.
f. Preservation of Seized Facsimile or Fax Machine or Similar Devices
If the fax machine is “ON”, do not turn it “OFF” as it may cause the loss
of the last number dialed or other stored fax numbers. If possible, all manuals
should be seized along with the machine. Photographs of the machine and its
display shall be taken.
g. Preservation of Seized Caller ID Devices and Other Similar Devices
1) The IOC should be able to recognize potential evidence contained
in caller ID devices such as telephone numbers and subscriber’s
information from incoming phone calls.
Chapter 3



77
2) The IOC should remember that interruption of the power supply of
the caller ID device may cause loss of data if not protected by an
internal battery back-up.
h. Guidelines in the Treatment of Seized Digital Video Recording (DVR)
Devices
1) The IOC should be able to recognize potential evidence contained
in DVR devices such as the date and time of occurrence and the
persons viewed on the video captured by the Audio and Video
Recorder (AVR) and camera devices; and
2) The IOC should secure a warrant for the conduct of forensic
examination/enhancement of audio video recorded by the DVR
device.
i. Acquiring the DVR Devices and/or their Footages/Recording
1) The IOC shall send a Preservation Letter (Annex “Y”) addressed
to the DVR device owner directing him/her to keep, retain and
preserve the footages/recordings; and
2) A court order or a notarized affidavit of consent together with the
photocopy of valid ID from the DVR device owner or authorized
administrator must be secured to obtain the original and/or
duplicate copies of footages/recordings.
Rule 3 Internal Security Operations
The PNP shall provide active support to the AFP in Internal Security
Operations (ISO) for the suppression of the TGs and other serious threats to
national security. In the conduct of ISO, the PNP quad concept shall be integrated
and applied.
Chapter 3



78
3.1 The PNP in an Active Support Role
The PNP shall perform the following:
a. In white areas of operation, the PNP may assume the lead role in ISO
against the TGs, other threats to national security and OCGs engaged
in armed offensives. In red areas of operation, the AFP will assume the
lead role (AFP-PNP JLD No.3, 2020);
b. Coordination with the territorial AFP and other uniformed services must
be made in writing before the conduct of ISO. However, in justifiable
circumstances, electronic means may be allowed;
c. Specific areas where atrocities initiated by the TG occurred, such as
but not limited to ambush, harassment, arson, raid, liquidation and
bombing, shall be treated as a crime scene. The LPU shall conduct the
Crime Scene Investigation (CSI); and
d. Specific areas where armed encounters occurred shall likewise be
investigated by the LPU for purposes of evidence and intelligence
gathering.
3.2 Law Enforcement Operations Against Terrorist Groups and other
Threats to National Security.
The PNP shall take the lead role in the conduct of sustained law enforcement
operations against TGs and other threats to national security to include but not
limited to the service of warrant of arrest, implementation of search warrant,
entrapment, and hot pursuit.
In the conduct of law enforcement operations in Moro Islamic Liberation
Front (MILF) areas/communities identified by the Ad Hoc Joint Action Group
(AHJAG), coordination with the latter shall be made by the implementing/operating
PNP Unit Commander.
3.3 Target Hardening.
Police stations, patrol bases of mobile forces and established checkpoints,
especially those located in far-flung areas, are prone to attacks. As such, security
Chapter 3



79
measures to prevent atrocities of terrorist groups must be undertaken such as but
not limited to:
a. Conduct of security survey and inspection to assess defense viability;
b. Strengthen physical security measures and defense to prevent
unauthorized access;
c. Develop security consciousness among personnel through education
and training;
d. Conduct regular Red Teaming Operations to check and provide solutions
to identified gaps in the security plan;
e. Conduct community organization and mobilization activities to
encourage the community to immediately report the presence and
plans of TGs;
f. Internalize and put into practice the 11 General Orders of a Duty Guard.
(Annex “Z”) Likewise, personnel on duty shall always carry issued
long firearms and ammunition rig/bandoliers with basic load and wear
bulletproof vest;
g. Whenever there is an arrested individual identified to be a member or
associated with TGs, a mandatory DNA collection sample should be
taken from the arrested individual upon request of the arresting police
unit to the PNP CL in support to investigation and as part of the record/
database of the PNP for future investigation/intelligence operations;
and
h. Regularly conduct simulation exercise on camp defense to improve
operational readiness of PNP personnel and capabilities.
Chapter 3



80
Rule 4 Public Safety Operations
4.1 PNP Critical Incident Management Operational Procedures (CIMOP)
As a matter of policy, human-induced (man-made) critical incidents are
the responsibilities of the National and Local Peace and Order Council (NPOC)
while natural calamities and disasters are the responsibilities of the National and
Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC). Lower-level
organizations of the NPOC and NDRRMC take cognizance of the responsibilities
ascribed in their national organization. The PNP, being at the forefront of crisis
situations, must play an active role by organizing its own Critical Incident
Management Committee (CIMC) to support the NPOC and NDRRMC.
The Crisis Management Committee (CMC) is primarily concerned with the
formulation of crisis management procedures, integration and orchestration of
government, military/police and public efforts towards the prevention and control
of crisis incidents. All actions and decisions taken by the CMC shall be within the
policies laid down by the corresponding Peace and Order Councils (POCs).
The National POC (NPOC) chaired by the Secretary of Interior and Local
Government (SILG) is tasked to contribute to the strategies of the National Security
Council, coordinate and monitor, and serve as a forum for deliberation for peace
and order concerns. This Council outlines its roles and responsibilities to threats
to peace and order.
The Incident Command System (ICS) shall be adopted as a template in
responding to critical incidents. This provides guidance to the PNP’s roles on how
to organize its assets to respond to an incident and processes to manage the
response through its successive stages.
a. Types of Critical Incidents
PNP Incident Management Operations complement the Peace and
Order Councils (POCs) – CMCs and DRRMC from the National, Regional,
Provincial, City and Municipal levels. The procedures under this Rule shall
be observed by all PNP Units/Offices with respect to their roles in addressing
human induced incidents and police responses to natural calamity and
disaster (PNP MC 2013-021 “PNP Critical Incident Management Operational
Procedures”).
Chapter 3



81
1) Natural Calamity and Disaster. In the event of natural calamity and
disaster, the PNP shall act as the first responder in the affected
area in order to provide area security and support in the conduct
of search, rescue and retrieval operations to be spearheaded by
the area DRRMCs.
2) Human Induced Incidents. In the event of human induced incidents,
the PNP shall respond to two different situations:
a) To manage an incident that could be resolved by ordinary
police response without the involvement of the Crisis
Management Committee (CMC);
b) To manage an incident that needs a CMC–directed operation
requiring the implementation of special tasks by one or more
of the urgent services of the Philippine government.
Both actions of the PNP in either situation follow the ICS operational
procedures.
All actions of the PNP in addressing these critical incidents are in support
to the POC – CMCs and DRRMCs with common objectives of saving lives
and properties, resolution of the critical incidents at the earliest possible
time, and restoration of normalcy in the affected areas.
Based on the National Crisis Management Core Manual series of 2012,
the National Crisis Management Framework provides a comprehensive
approach to understand the components of a crisis or the 5Ps of Crisis
Management: Predict, Prevent, Prepare, Perform and Post-Action and
Assessment (Annex “AA”).
b. Stages in Disaster Management
1) Pre - Disaster Stage - Pro-active Assessment. When there is no
disaster or calamity:
a) Risk Mapping and identification of disaster-prone areas;
b) Identification of staging areas, evacuation routes and
evacuation centers;
Chapter 3



82
c) Disaster response drills, simulation exercises and trainings
for flood, earthquake, fire etc;
d) Meeting of regular Task Groups and Sub-Task Groups
together with respective levels of the National Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Councils;
e) Capability audit (manpower, machines, materials, money
and methods);
f) Awareness campaign through TRIMP; and
g) Community mobilization activities such as but not limited to:
(1) Sewerage clean-up;
(2) De-clogging of waterways, canals, esteros; and
(3) Clearing of unauthorized structures in disaster prone
areas.
2) Disaster Response Stage - Disaster Incident Management (Level
2 - Red). When there is an impending natural calamity or when an
unexpected human-induced incident and natural calamity occur:
a) Natural Calamity
(1) Activation of Disaster Incident Management Task
Groups (DIMTG);
(2) Coordination with NDRRMC to support its disaster
response;
(3) Employment of alarm and warning systems such as the
use of police sirens and other portable warning systems
capable of producing loud wailing sound;
(4) Pre-emptive evacuation of residents in affected areas
in coordination with concerned government agencies;
and
Chapter 3



83
(5) Provision of security in calamity area and support
search, rescue and retrieval operation, evacuation
and emergency medical services in coordination with
concerned DRRMC.
b) Human Induced Incident
(1) Activation of Critical Incident Management Task Group
(CIMTG);
(2) Coordination with NPOC-CMC or its equivalent to
support its crisis response;
(3) Evacuation of residents in the crisis area in coordination
with concerned government agencies; and
(4) Provision of security in crisis area and support
search, rescue and retrieval operation, evacuation
and emergency medical services in coordination with
concerned agencies.
3) Post-Disaster Stage - Support to Recovery and Rehabilitation
Efforts (Level 3- White).
a) Acquisition of Rapid Damage Assessment and Needs
Analysis (RDANA) reports from concerned Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Council of the affected areas;
b) Deployment of personnel for relief operations;
c) Provision of security and traffic assistance to returning
evacuees;
d) Submission of After Disaster Response Report to the C, PNP
copy furnished DRRMC; and
e) Deactivation of the DIMTG/ CIMTG when the situation is
already manageable in disaster-stricken area.
In the Management of the Dead and Missing Persons (MDM) the
PNP CL shall take the lead in identifying the remains of victims during
Chapter 3



84
and after human-induced disasters, while the NBI shall take the lead in
the identification of remains of victims during and after a natural calamity.
c. Alert Levels During Human-Induced Critical Incident. Terrorism and
threat group alert level shall be disseminated by TDI to all concerned
offices based on the information provided by NICA.
1) Level 1 (Low) – There is no information to suggest a specific
human-induced critical incident may occur.
2) Level 2 (Moderate) –Human-induced critical incident is possible,
but not likely.
3) Level 3 (High) – There is a strong possibility that human-induced
critical incident may occur within a short period of time.
4) Level 4 (Extreme) – A human-induced critical incident has just
occurred or has just been pre-empted;
d. Incident Command System (ICS). The ICS, provided under National
Crisis Management Core Manual, is structured on six major functional
areas: Command, Operations, Planning, Logistics, Finance,
Administration, and Intelligence/Investigation as an optional seventh
functional area that is activated on a case-to-case basis. (Annex “BB”).
On the enactment of Republic Act (RA) 10121, otherwise known as the
Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM) Law, on May
27 2010, the Philippine government took a proactive approach to manage
the disaster consequences and reduce disaster risks by institutionalizing
various mechanisms. Among these is the ICS.
ICS is one of the flagship programs of the Office of the Office of the Civil
Defense (OCD). As provided for in RA 10121, the NDRRMC Memorandum
Circular No. 4 s 2012 and the Executive Order No. 82 s 2012, ICS has been
institutionalized as an on-scene, all-hazard incident management concept
introduced by the US Forest Service that can be used by all DRRM Councils,
emergency management and response agencies. It is a disaster response
tool that coordinates the actions of all response groups.
ICS has been proven effective in managing potential and actual disaster
consequences. It has significantly enhanced the mechanism for resource
Chapter 3



85
management, reporting and documentation, promotion of responder safety,
and optimum achievement of response objectives as evident in past major
disaster response operations to include management of planned highdensity population gatherings.
e. Organization and Structure of CIMC/CIMTG/DIMTG
In accordance with Executive Order NO. 82, series of 2012, CMCs shall
be established at all levels specifically to take decisive action in responding
to and managing human-induced crisis.
The local CMC, headed by the local chief executive as the responsible
officer (RO), designates the Incident Commander (IC) whenever a particular
crisis occurs. If the LPU commander is designated as the IC, the CIMTG
shall be immediately activated to support the CMC.
1) The Crisis Management Committee (CMC)
The CMC (Annex “CC”) is primarily concerned with the formulation
of crisis management procedures, integration and orchestration of
government, military/police and public efforts towards the prevention
and control of crisis incidents. All actions and decisions taken by the
CMC shall be within the policies laid down by the corresponding POCs.
2) The PNP NHQ Critical Incident Management Committee (PNP
NHQ CIMC)
In support to the mandates of CMCs, the PNP NHQ shall organize
its CIMC (Annex “DD”) with five sub-committees namely: sub-committee
on criminality, sub-committee on destabilization, public disturbance
and planned events, sub-committee on terrorism and CBRNE, subcommittee on public health hazards and sub- committee on natural
disasters. This Committee shall take cognizance of all critical incidents,
whether human-induced or natural disaster, and shall supervise/
oversee operations of concerned offices/units to mitigate its effects on
the general populace. It is primarily concerned with the implementation
of policies and orchestration of PNP’s force and resources and efforts
towards the control and mitigation of critical incidents. The NHQ CIMTG/
DIMTG shall also be activated and shall serve as a special operating
task group of the CIMC.
Chapter 3



86
3) The Critical Incident Management Task Group (CIMTG)
To carry out the mandates of the PNP CIMC on human-induced
(man-made) incidents, CIMTGs (Annexes “EE” and “EE-1”) shall be
organized and replicated at the PRO/NCRPO (Regional) level down
to the PPO/CPO; CPS/MPS (City/Municipal) level following the ICS
structure.
The IC shall be designated by the Chairman, CMC and CIMTG to
be complemented by the Officers of the Office/unit who has functional
staff functions in the organization.
At the Regional/Provincial/City/Municipal level, the PNPs response
to any crisis will be to activate the CIMTG for human-induced incident
and the DIMTG for natural disaster. The Regional Director/Provincial/
City Director/COP shall have the authority to activate the CIMTG or
DIMTG.
The following are considered as human-induced critical incidents:
a) Abduction involving prominent personalities such as national
and local government officials, foreign nationals (diplomats,
ambassadors, consuls, attaches, foreign tourists), religious
leaders from various religious congregations, and other
personalities whose involvement in incidents may result in
controversies;
b) Attacks on vital installations, communities, and prominent
personalities;
c) Jailbreaks;
d) Heinous crimes like assassination, ambush involving
prominent personalities;
e) Robbery hold-up, armored van robbery, and bank robbery
perpetrated by syndicated groups;
f) Election –Related Violent Incident (ERV);
g) Major Events (International and National);
h) Terrorism;
i) Conflagration Incidents;
j) Major Road Accidents;
k) Mass Transport Accidents;
l) Aircraft Hijackings;
Chapter 3



87
m) Sea Mishaps;
n) Bombings;
o) Indiscriminate active shooting;
p) Mass actions;
q) Mass poisoning;
r) Drone attack;
s) Gas leaks;
t) Nuclear and Radiation Accidents;
u) Chemical Disaster;
v) Biological Disaster;
w) Cyber-attacks;
x) Epidemic;
y) Pandemic;
z) Stampede;
aa) Industrial Accident;
bb) Oil spills; and
cc) Other similar human-induced critical incidents that may result
in human casualties and/or mass destruction of properties
and environment.
As applicable, the following shall be designated to handle the functional
responsibilities of the CIMTG depending on the level of its activation:
Incident Commander: DRDO/DDDO/DPDO/DCDO/DCOPO
Deputy Incident Commander: RCS/CDDS/OPB/C, OPNS
Public Information Officer: Unit C, PIO
Liaison Officer: PCR Officer
Safety Officer: C, RHSG/C, DHSG/PESPO/SESPO
Operations /Plans Staff: C, PL/C, PL/C, PLB/ C, OPNS
Intel/Invest Staff: C, RID/ C, DID/C, IB/IMB/C, IIS
Budget and Logistics Staff: C, RLD/C, DF/C, PLB/C, Finance
In accordance with Executive Order 320, as amended, NPOC has
constituted CMCs at all levels specifically to take decisive action in emergency
situations.
Chapter 3



88
4) Disaster Incident Management Task Group (DIMTG)
A DIMTG shall also be established and shall serve as a special
operating task group of the PNP Sub-Committee on Disaster Management
(SCDM) and assist the PRO DIMTG as the Chairman/Task Coordinator,
PNP SCDM may direct. The NHQ PNP shall be composed of the NSUs
to be headed by the Director, PNP Special Action Force (SAF) as Task
Group Commander with the Deputy Director of PCRG as the Deputy Task
Group Commander (Annex “FF”).
DIMTGs shall also be activated at the PRO/PPO/CPO/CPS/MPS
level depending on the affected area (Annex “FF-1”). As a matter of rule,
a Regional DIMTG shall be activated if two or more provinces/cities are
affected by disaster, a Provincial DIMTG shall be activated if two or more
municipalities are affected, and a Municipal DIMTG shall be activated if
two or more barangays are affected (LOI 35/10 “SAKLOLO REVISED”).
The following are considered natural disaster incidents:
a) Floods;
b) Landslides;
c) Volcanic Eruption;
d) Earthquake;
e) Tidal Wave;
f) Tsunami;
g) Storm surge;
h) Forest fire;
i) Drought;
j) Meteorite impact;
k) Tornado; and
l) Other natural hazards that may lead to colossal loss of property
and lives.
Chapter 3



89
As applicable, the following shall be designated to handle the functional
responsibilities of the DIMTG:
Incident Commander: D,SAF/DRDO/DDDO/DPDO/DCDO/COP
Deputy Incident Commander: DDPCR/RCS/CDDS/D, IC/DCOP
Public Information Officer: Unit C, PIO
Liaison Officer: D, PCADG/C, RPCR/C, PCR/C,WCPD
Safety Officer: D, HSS/C, RHSG/C, DHSG/PESPO/
SESPO
Operations/Plans Staff: DDO/DDPL/ C, PLD/C, PLB/C, OPNS
Intel/Invest Staff: DDI/DDIDM/C, RID/RIDMD/C, DID/DIDMD/C, IB/IMB/C, I&IS
Budget and Logistics Staff: DDL/C, RLD/RCD/C, DF/LD/C, PLB/C,
FINANCE
Admin Staff: DD, DPRM/C, RPMD/C, DPHRDD/C,
PHRDB/C, ADMIN
f. The Escalation Protocols
The responsibility of addressing crisis can be transferred if the increasing
needs in handling the incident are beyond the capability of the established
CIMTG or DIMTG, or if there is jurisdictional change, when the incident
moves location or area of responsibility crosses boundaries. The transfer
of responsibility during a crisis must always include a transfer of command
briefing which may be oral, written or combination of both.
1) Human-Induced Escalation Protocol (CIMTG). To attain a smooth
transition of command responsibility, the table shows the conditions
or situations in any crisis level that will be considered:
Chapter 3



90
Table 3.1 Human-Induced Escalation Protocols
CIMTG Activation Level Conditions or Situations
Municipal/City (MPS/CPS
Numbered PS)
a. Local PNP and Local CMC are in control of the
situation; and
b. Appropriate resources are available and
capable at either Municipal or Barangay Level.
Provincial/District PPO/DPO
a. Local PNP at the Municipal/City Level are unable
to resolve the crisis within their capabilities;
b. Municipal/City CMC recommends elevation of
the crisis level;
c. Situation requires employment of security
forces and utilization of resources of the
provincial level organization and beyond; and
d. Incident affects two or more municipalities
within the same province/district.
Regional (PRO/NCRPO)
a. Situation requires employment of security
forces and utilization of resources of the
Regional level organizations;
b. Upon the recommendation of the Provincial
CMC;
c. Incident involves foreign nationals, either
perpetrators or victims; and
d. Incidents affects two or more provinces/districts
within the same region
National (NHQ)
a. Terrorism attach resulting into mass casualties;
b. Upon recommendation of the Regional CMC;
c. Incident involves foreign national/s, either
perpetrators or victims;
d. National Security issues are at stake, such as
food, water, energy, critical transportation and
communication structure, and environment are
threatened; and
e. Incident affects NCR, or two or more regions.
However, the Task Group Commanders/RDs
remains in command in their respective PROs.
Chapter 3



91
2) Natural Disaster Escalation Protocol (DIMTG)
Table 3.2 Natural Disaster Escalation Protocols
DIMTG Activation Level Conditions or Situations
CPS/MPS Level Two or more barangays or the entire CPS/MPS
PPO/CPO Level Two or more CPS/MPS or the entire PPO/CPO
PRO Level Two or more Districts/PPOs/CPOs or the entire
PRO
NHQ Level Two or more PROs
4.2 Hostage Situation. In handling hostage situations, the following guidelines
and procedures shall be undertaken:
a. First Responders (FR)
1) Secure the incident scene and establish perimeter security.
2) Give situation update to concerned TOC and inform the Hostage
Negotiation Team (HNT) for possible deployment.
3) Do not allow unauthorized persons at the incident scene.
4) Gather information about the hostage-taker and hostage(s) from
witnesses.
5) Re-route traffic flow (if necessary).
6) Evacuate all persons within the vicinity of the incident scene.
7) Clear areas for use of other responders.
8) Establish Advanced Command Post (ACP).
9) Initiate contact with the hostage-taker through any available
means.
Chapter 3



92
10) If the situation becomes volatile, request for deployment of HNT.
However, at any given time, if the hostage-taker is neutralized, the
HNT may no longer be necessary.
11) Brief the TL, HNT of the situation and turn-over the conduct of
negotiation.
12) Stay at the incident scene to maintain security, crowd and traffic
control, preserve evidence and take custody of witnesses.
b. Incident Commander (IC)
There shall be only one IC holding at least a senior rank and/or one with
experience in hostage/crisis situation or relative training. Until such time that
he/she officially designates a spokesperson, he/she may issue appropriate
press statements and continue to perform the role of the spokesperson.
1) The IC shall, upon assessment of the situation, prepare necessary
plans including but not limited to the following:
a) Emergency Response Plan - depends on the threat posed
by the hostage-takers and need of the HNT and IC.
b) Breakout Plan - possibility of breakout shall be considered
immediately upon drawing up of negotiation strategy. This
should be considered as one of the priority plans.
c) Delivery Plan - in case the hostage-takers change plans in
the middle of the execution.
d) Surrender Plan - shall be drawn up in a way that the Hostages’
lives will not be jeopardized.
e) Hostage Reception/Release - for security reasons, released
hostages shall be contained and isolated.
f) Collection Plan - safety of the police personnel involved is
the priority consideration.
Chapter 3



93
2) In handling hostage situations, the IC shall be guided by the
following courses of actions:
a) Negotiate
(1) Situation must be stabilized first before the start of the
negotiation.
(2) All attempts to negotiate must be done by remote
means.
(3) Adherence to the basic policy on safety of the hostage
shall be paramount.
(4) Do not allow outsiders (non-law enforcement officers)
into the negotiation process, unless their presence is
extremely necessary in the solution of the crisis. If so,
they shall be properly advised on the Do’s and Don’ts
of the hostage negotiation.
(5) Provide relevant information to the tactical teams.
(6) All communication with the hostage-taker must be
secured and protected.
(7) Always adhere to the ethics of negotiation.
b) Arrest
(1) Effect the arrest of the hostage-taker when situation
warrants.
(2) Restrain the hostage-taker and conduct thorough
search on his/her body and the immediate vicinity of
the incident scene.
(3) Inform the arrested person of the circumstances of his/
her arrest, and recite the Miranda warning, and antitorture warning.
Chapter 3



94
(4) All evidence must be secured and properly documented.
(5) Use reasonable force in arresting the hostage-taker.
(6) Facilitate the transport of the hostage-taker to the
nearest police station.
c) Tactical assault
(1) It may be resorted to if the hostage-taker poses imminent
danger of causing death or injury to the negotiator or
hostage.
(2) When all peaceful means were utilized and failed
and the hostage-taker is determined to become more
violent.
(3) When peaceful resolution of the incident becomes
impossible.
c. Hostage Negotiation Team (HNT)
Negotiators shall be designated by IC. No one shall be allowed to talk
to the hostage-taker without clearance from the Negotiator or IC. The HNT
is directly under the control and supervision of the IC. The HNT consists
of the team leader/coordinator, primary negotiator, secondary negotiator,
intelligence liaison/recorder and board negotiator. The HNT shall:
1) Set-up Negotiation Operation Center (NOC);
2) Initiate contact with the hostage-taker and obtain other information;
3) Give updates to the IC and brief him/her of the current situation;
4) Evaluate the necessity of resorting to other option without
compromising the safety of the hostage(s);
5) Recommend for activation of CMC and deployment of CIMTG as
necessary;
Chapter 3



95
6) Facilitate all deliveries, hostage receptions, and release and
possible surrender of hostage-taker; and
7) Attend to all meetings called by the CMC or IC.
d. Assault Team
An assault team shall be alerted for deployment in case the negotiation
fails. Members of the assault team shall wear authorized and easily
recognizable uniform during the conduct of the operation.
e. Crowd Control
A crowd control team shall be deployed to manage and control the
crowd and augment the first responders in securing the perimeter.
f. Support Personnel.
Support personnel shall include those in charge of managing traffic,
firefighting, providing medical emergency assistance, crime scene processing
and rescue.
g. After the neutralization of the hostage-taker/s and rescue of the
hostage/s, the following processing and debriefing procedures shall be
under taken:
1) Clear and secure the crime scene to avoid contamination of
evidence;
2) Evacuate the hostages and other injured persons;
3) Conduct CSI;
4) Conduct debriefing on the hostages and participating personnel;
5) Take the sworn statement of witnesses, hostages, hostage-taker,
and key participants in the incident;
6) Initiate case conferences to facilitate filing of cases;
Chapter 3



96
7) Issue press statements;
8) Submit reports to higher headquarters; and
9) Deactivate the CMC and CIMTG.
4.3 Bomb Threat and Bomb Incident Emergency Response
a. Procedures for FR Upon Receipt of Any Bomb Threat:
1) Treat all threats as serious until proven otherwise;
2) Determine the exact location of the establishment under threat;
3) Proceed immediately to the scene;
4) Coordinate with the security manager or administrator;
5) Conduct visual search in the area and isolate the specific place,
if necessary, when a suspicious item is located without causing
panic;
6) Alert EODT/K9;
7) Notify HHQ of any development and continue giving updates;
8) Brief the EOD/K9 team upon arrival and assist if necessary; and
9) Provide security at the scene until such time when the EOD/K9
team declares the area is cleared of any incendiaries or explosives.
b. Procedures for FR if a suspected item is found and the EOD/K9
recommended an evacuation from the affected area.
1) Coordinate with the management or administrator to identify the
safety areas for evacuation;
2) Assist in the evacuation of people without causing panic while the
EOD/K9 conducts panelling procedures;
3) Cordon the isolated area to prevent entry of unauthorized persons;
and
Chapter 3



97
4) Coordinate with the management once the EOD/K9 declares the
area as cleared and assist the people in resuming their businesses.
c. Procedures for FR if the EOD/K9 confirmed the presence of an explosive
component or Improvised Explosive Device (IED):
1) Report the progress of the incident to the TOC for the following:
a) Summon ambulance and fire trucks to the scene; and
b) Request for deployment of additional police personnel
 to establish traffic control, crowd control and security.
2) Lock down the affected area to a distance of at least 300 meters
away;
d. Procedures for FR in case of Bomb Explosion
1) Upon receipt of the report:
a) Identify exact location of the incident and proceed to the
scene immediately;
b) Direct EOD/K9 teams to proceed to the area;
c) Notify HHQ of the situation;
d) Report the incident to the TOC for the following:
(1) Summon ambulance, fire trucks and SOCO team to the
scene and other resources as may be determined;
(2) Request for deployment of additional police personnel
to establish traffic control, crowd control and security;
2) Upon arrival at the scene:
a) Cordon the area at least 150 meters from the location of
explosion;
b) Assist in the immediate evacuation of the injured if possible;
Chapter 3



98
c) Direct occupants of the establishment to evacuate;
d) Maintain order and crowd control;
e) Seal off location until the EOD/K9 team determines if a
secondary device exists;
f) Conduct rescue operations at the scene upon clearance of
the EOD/K9 team;
g) Assist the Post-Blast Investigation (PBI) team and SOCO
team upon clearance from the EOD/K9 team;
h) Submit initial incident report immediately with the following
information:
(1) Time when the call for bomb threat was received;
(2) Time of detonation/explosion; and
(3) Description of type of device.
i) Identify any witnesses and bring them to the nearest police
station to obtain their statement;
j) Avoid issuing “speculative” press releases or statements;
and
k) Ensure cooperation with the IOC.
4.4 Civil Disturbance Management (CDM) Operations
a. General Guidelines
The PNP units tasked to maintain peace and order shall not interfere
with the holding of public assembly. To ensure public safety, a CDM
contingent under the command of a PCO shall be detailed and stationed at
least 100 meters away from the place where the public assembly is being
held (Batas Pambansa 880 sec. 9). In the absence of any permit from the
LGU concerned, the PCO in command should exert effort in persuading the
Chapter 3



99
demonstrators to disperse peacefully and vacate the public place. In lightning
rallies or demonstrations, the Ground Commander shall exhaust efforts
through dialogue with the leaders/organizers for voluntary dispersal. In case
of failure, orderly dispersal, to include apprehension of those responsible,
shall be resorted to. Maximum tolerance must always be exercised (Batas
Pambansa 880 sec. 10).
b. Specific Guidelines
When assistance is requested by the leaders/organizers, it shall be
imperative for the CDM contingent to perform their duties while observing the
rights of demonstrators. Further, the members of the CDM contingent dealing
with the demonstrators shall be in prescribed uniform.
1) The CDM contingent shall not carry any kind of firearms but may
be equipped with batons or riot sticks, crash helmets with visor,
gas masks, boots or ankle-high shoes with shin guards.
2) Tear gas, smoke grenades, water cannons, or any similar anti-riot
device shall not be used unless the public assembly is attended
by actual violence or serious threats of violence, or deliberate
destruction of property.
3) The organization and membership of CDM contingents, as well
as their deployment and employment, shall be in accordance with
existing PNP rules and regulations.
4) For every CDM contingent, there shall be a team of negotiators.
5) A separate security contingent may be organized and ready to
provide immediate assistance to the CDM contingents as the need
arises.
c. CDM Operational Tasks
1) Isolate the area;
2) Secure likely targets;
3) Control the crowds;
Chapter 3



100
4) Establish area control; and
5) Arrest violators.
d. CDM Operational Approaches
1) The commitment of a CDM contingent must be viewed as a last
resort. Their role, therefore, should never be greater than what is
necessary under the circumstances. This does not mean though
that the number of troops employed should be minimized. Doubts
concerning the number of troops required should normally be
resolved in favor of deploying a large number as it may prevent
the development of situations in which the use of force would be
necessary. A large reserve of troops should be maintained during
civil disturbance operations.
2) In selecting an operational approach to a civil disturbance situation,
the Ground Commander and his/her personnel must adhere to the
procedures in Force Continuum in Chapter 2 Section 2-4 of this
POP.
3) Efforts should be exerted to create the image of a restrained and
well-disciplined force, the sole purpose of which is to assist in the
restoration of law and order. Further, while CDM contingent should
be visible, any activity which might excite rather than calm the
situation should be avoided when possible.
4) Consistent with the controlling principle “that he/she must use
the minimum necessary force to accomplish his/her mission”,
the Ground Commander shall equip the CDM contingent only
with rattan sticks/truncheons/batons, shields, kevlar helmets and
handcuffs.
5) In situations requiring the use of batons/truncheons, only target
fleshy parts of the body such as arms, torso, legs, and thighs.
Hitting protesters with the baton or truncheon on the head, face,
neck, shoulder blades, elbows, fingers, groins, knees, and ankles
must be avoided since strikes to these parts may cause serious to
permanent injuries, or even death.
Chapter 3



101
6) Arrested protesters must be restrained, handcuffed and brought
safely to the police station for processing.
7) In any CDM deployment, there should be trained and equipped
female CDM personnel.
4.5 Public Assembly
a. Policies
1) The PNP adheres to the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement
Officials (1979, Art 2-3) adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations that requires law enforcement officials to respect
and protect human dignity, maintain and uphold the human rights
of all persons, and limit the use of force to situations where it is
strictly necessary and to the extent required for the performance
of their duty.
2) Public assemblies held in freedom parks or on private property do
not need a permit for the activity.
3) The PNP shall provide police assistance only when requested by
the leaders or organizers for maintenance of peace and order or
to ensure the safety of those participating in the public assemblies
held in freedom parks or on private property.
4) A public assembly held in a public place must have a permit from
the mayor of the city or municipality exercising jurisdiction over the
place where it will be held.
5) A public assembly held with or without a permit may be peacefully
dispersed. A public assembly with a permit may be dispersed if
the same is being held in violation of the terms and conditions
imposed in the permit. In both cases, before conducting any
dispersal operation, the PNP shall notify the concerned organizers
and leaders of the public assembly.
6) Lightning demonstrations or rallies in areas where public assembly
is prohibited shall be dispersed peacefully. However, should any of
Chapter 3



102
the participants refuse to disperse voluntarily or violate any law or
ordinance during an unauthorized public assembly, they shall be
taken into police custody and be charged accordingly.
7) Ground Commanders are responsible in determining whether
there is a permit for the holding of the public assembly.
8) Close coordination with the mayor of the city or municipality, or
his/her representative, where the public assembly is being held
should always be maintained especially when a permit has not
been issued but an application has been filed prior to the holding
of the public assembly.
9) Maximum tolerance shall be exercised in the conduct of dispersal
operations.
b. Police Responses
The following are the police responses during the planning stage, initial
and peaceful stage, confrontational stage, violent stage and post operation
stage:
1) During Planning Stage
a) Initiate dialogue with the leaders/organizers to ensure the
peaceful holding of a public assembly, including among
others, the detail of police personnel providing security in the
area.
b) Prepare appropriate security and CDM contingency plans.
2) During Initial and Peaceful Stage
a) With Permit or Held in Freedom Parks/ Private Properties
(1) The PNP shall not interfere with the holding of a public
assembly. However, to adequately ensure public safety,
a CDM contingent, under the control and supervision of
a PCO shall be stationed at least 100 meters away from
the area where the public assembly is being held.
Chapter 3



103
(2) Monitor the activities at the public assembly area and
respond to any request for police assistance.
b) Without Permit or Permit has been revoked
(1) As soon as it becomes apparent that an assembly is
being held in a public place, the Ground Commander
shall immediately conduct an inquiry whether the
assembly is covered with a permit or not. If a permit
could not be shown, verification should immediately be
done with the Office of the Mayor having jurisdiction
over the place where the public assembly is being held.
Should the Office of the Mayor confirm that a permit
has not been issued, the leaders/organizers shall be
informed of the fact that they are violating the law and
will be asked to disperse peacefully.
(2) The PNP shall exhaust all peaceful remedies to
persuade the demonstrators to disperse. This may
include the involvement of Local Chief Executives
(LCE)/community leaders when available to intervene
in the situation so that dispersal operations could be
avoided.
(3) Should negotiation fail and the demonstrators refuse
to disperse voluntarily and peacefully, thereby causing
public inconvenience, CDM contingents may commence
dispersal operations after the CDM commander
announced the violations of law they have committed.
Such announcement of the violations must be made at
least three times.
3) During Breach of Peace/Confrontational Stage (With or without
permit)
No public assembly with a permit shall be dispersed. However,
when a public assembly becomes violent, the CDM contingents may
disperse such public assembly in the following manner:
Chapter 3



104
a) At the first sign of an impending violence, the Ground
Commander shall call the attention of the leaders/organizers
of the public assembly and ask the latter to prevent any
possible disturbance. CDM contingents shall hold the line to
prevent demonstrators from proceeding to other areas where
the holding of a public assembly is prohibited.
b) If actual violence reaches a point where rocks or other
harmful objects from the participants are thrown at the
CDM contingents or the non-participants, or at any property
causing damage to it, the Ground Commander shall audibly
warn the participants that if the disturbance persists, the
public assembly will be dispersed;
c) If the violence or disturbance does not stop, the Ground
Commander shall audibly issue a warning to the participants
of the public assembly, and after allowing a reasonable
period of time to lapse, shall immediately order it to disperse.
With the use of CDM formations, the rank of demonstrators
shall be disbanded, contained, and isolated from each other,
and should be prevented from regrouping.
d) Water cannons and riot sticks may be used to repel
aggression and to disperse demonstrators and reserve CDM
contingents may be employed when situation requires.
e) No arrest of any leader, organizer or participant shall be made
unless he/she violates a law, statute, or ordinance during the
assembly.
4) During Violent Stage
a) Non-lethal weapons and equipment may be used to suppress
violence, to protect lives and prevent further damage to
properties.
b) PNP security elements shall be tactically deployed to provide
immediate assistance to the CDM contingents.
Chapter 3



105
5) Post-Operation Stage:
a) CDM contingents shall be withdrawn after the area has been
cleared of possible danger to public safety.
b) Sufficient police force shall be maintained to ensure peace
and order in the area.
c. Dispersal of Public Assembly with Permit
All public assemblies with permits shall not be dispersed. However,
when an assembly becomes violent, the police may disperse such public
assembly in the following manner:
1) At the first sign of impending violence, the Ground Commander
of the PNP contingent shall call the attention of the leaders of
the public assembly and ask the latter to prevent any possible
disturbance;
2) If actual violence reaches a point where rocks or other harmful
objects from the participants are thrown at the police officers or at
the non-participants, or at any property, causing damage to it, the
Ground Commander of the PNP contingent shall audibly warn the
participants that if the disturbance persists, the public assembly
will be dispersed;
3) If the violence or disturbance does not stop, the Ground
Commander of the PNP contingent shall audibly issue a warning
to the participants of the public assembly, and after allowing a
reasonable period of time to lapse, he shall immediately order it to
disperse; and
4) No arrest of any leader, organizer or participant shall be made
unless he violates during the assembly a law, statute, or ordinance.
d. Dispersal of Public Assembly Without Permit
When the public assembly is held without a permit where a permit is
required, the said public assembly may be peacefully dispersed. However,
when the leaders or organizers of public assembly can show an application
Chapter 3



106
for permit duly filed at the Office of the Mayor which has jurisdiction over
the place where the rally will be held, at least five days prior to the intended
activity and the Mayor did not act on the same, the grant of the permit being
then presumed under the law, and it will be the burden of the authorities to
show that there has been a denial of the application, in which case, the rally
may be peacefully dispersed following the procedure of maximum tolerance
prescribed by law.
e. Prohibited Acts
The following prohibitions provided by Section 13 of Batas Pambansa
(BP) 880 shall be strictly observed:
1) Obstructing, impeding, disrupting or otherwise denying the
exercise of the right to peaceful assembly;
2) The unnecessary firing of firearms to disperse the public assembly.
3) Acts in violation of paragraph “d” of this Rule;
4) Acts described hereunder if committed within 100 meters from the
area of activity of the public assembly;
a) The carrying of a deadly or offensive weapon or device such
as firearm, pillbox, bomb, and the like;
b) The carrying of a bladed weapon;
c) The malicious burning of any object in the streets or
thoroughfares;
d) The carrying of firearms by CDM contingents;
e) The interfering with or intentionally disturbing the holding of a
public assembly by the use of a motor vehicle, its horns and
loud sound systems;
f) The drinking of liquor or alcoholic beverages; and
g) Gambling of any kind.
Chapter 3



107
f. Guidelines in dealing with Assemblies, Rallies, Demonstrations and
Marches
1) To ensure the protection, safety and welfare of the public and
demonstrators as well, the following must be observed:
a) Confined Assemblies in Private Property (churches, schools,
etc.)
(1) Initiate the conduct of dialogue with the leaders/
organizers.
(2) Secure and maintain order within the perimeter.
b) Confined Assemblies in Freedom Parks
(1) Initiate the conduct of dialogue with the leaders/
organizers.
(2) Secure and contain the area within the limits of the
permit to ensure the orderly and peaceful conduct of
the assembly.
c) Mobile Assemblies in a Private Area
(1) Initiate the conduct of dialogue with the leaders/
organizers.
(2) Secure and maintain order within the perimeter.
d) Marches and Motorcades along Public Thoroughfares
(1) Initiate the conduct of dialogue with the leaders/
organizers.
(2) Request for the permit from the leaders/organizers if
the local ordinance of the area requires one.
Chapter 3



108
(3) Ensure the orderly and peaceful conduct of the marches
and motorcades to ensure public safety and to prevent
compromise of public convenience.
2) There shall always be a designated Ground Commander at the
rally site;
3) If necessary, provide a medical team to extend assistance; and
4) All CDM operations shall be properly documented with video and
photo coverage;
4.6 Procedures for Responding PNP Personnel in Enforcing Quarantine
Measures to Manage Health Hazards
Since the outbreak of Covid-19, the PNP has played a crucial role in
supporting the government’s efforts to control the disease and promote safer
communities. Covid-19 may not be the last health hazard that the country will
experience. It is therefore essential for PNP personnel enforcing the quarantine
measures to work together with other government agencies, the local government
units and the community in addressing other similar threats.
a. Initial Response Upon the Impact of Health Hazard
1) PNP responders who first arrived at the scene shall initially and
simultaneously perform the following:
a) Assess and secure the scene, cordon and prevent the ingress
and egress of individuals to the area of impact;
b) Ensure the observance of safety protocol and use Personal
Protective Equipment (PPE) and respiratory protection;
c) In situations where the victims are directly exposed to a
non-contagious health hazard as assessed by authorities,
immediately evacuate them to a safe area while waiting for
the emergency responders;
d) Immediately inform the Chief of Police (COP) or Station
Commander and the station TOC, which will then call other
emergency groups;
Chapter 3



109
e) Make a record of the initial emergency responders who
arrived at the area and their actions taken;
2) Establish the Incident Command Post (ICP) with the COP or
Station Commander who shall initially act as IC until such time the
mayor or responsible officer has made an official designation of
his/her IC.
3) Immediately turn over the scene to the designated IC upon his/her
arrival;
4) Assist the IC in matters pertaining to the provision of security and
maintenance of law and order;
5) Designate an investigator who shall coordinate with the
investigators from BFP and other concerned agencies to gather
relevant information, if necessary;
6) If the health hazard is the result of an illegal act such as disposal
of hazardous materials, the PNP may immediately effect the arrest
of the identified suspect/s, if warranted; and
7) Wait for the official announcement that the area of impact has
been cleared from any health hazard before leaving the scene.
b. When the Health Hazard Becomes Widespread and has Affected Many
Communities
1) Assist in the implementation of government-issued guidelines and
issuances in mitigating the effect of health hazard;
2) Establish health hazard control points for the implementation of
travel restrictions without compromising the movement of essential
goods and authorized persons;
3) Implement the guidelines in the observance of the minimum public
health standards;
4) Activate law and order cluster and observe the CIMOP guidelines;
Chapter 3



110
5) Ensure that all PNP personnel rendering duty in health hazard
control points, isolation or quarantine facilities are using appropriate
PPEs;
6) Coordinate with the PNP health service in organizing and
capacitating the Medical Reserve Force (MRFs) in the management
of health hazard;
7) Assist the LGUs in the conduct of contact tracing when requested;
8) Provide security in quarantine/isolation facilities or escort in the
transport of affected and infected individuals, when requested; and
9) Observe proper decontamination procedures/protocol in
coordination with the PNP Health Service or other authorized
health offices.
c. Other Activities Relative to Public Safety and Security
1) Organize Reactionary Support and Standby Force (RSSF) for
possible deployment;
2) Provide security in the arrival, transport and distribution of goods
and medical supplies;
3) Conduct Red Teaming operations;
4) Conduct awareness campaign through TRIMP; and
5) Provide security to other government programs/activities that
require police assistance;
d. Arrest of Violators in Relation to Health Hazard Laws, Guidelines and
Protocols
1) PNP personnel must be abreast of the prevailing directives, laws,
and ordinances relating to health hazards and must maintain
copies of the same;
2) Arrest shall be done in accordance with guidelines and procedures
on Arrest in Rule 2.6 of this POP and with observance of public
health standards and protocol;
Chapter 3



111
3) All arrested persons shall be subjected to an initial investigation
and booking at a designated holding area if necessary. They shall
be separated from other persons under police custody until cleared
from any diseases/infection;
4) When the law or ordinance prescribes the penalty of fine and allows
the person apprehended to pay voluntarily the fine imposed prior
to the filing of a formal complaint with the appropriate prosecution
office, he/she shall be allowed to pay said fine with the concerned
City/Municipality/Barangay where he/she was apprehended to
avoid being criminally prosecuted; and
5) Respect for human rights and dignity of persons shall be observed
at all times.
Rule 5 Special Police Operations
5.1 Major Events Security Management
Major events are events of national and international significance where
the overall responsibility for ensuring the safety and security rests with the host
country/region/organization among others. These events involve very very
important persons (VVIPS) and political figures who are potential targets of
terrorists, criminals, and protest actions. Extensive planning and comprehensive
approach are necessary in developing the security plan for a major event.
The PNP undertakes necessary administrative and operational activities to
ensure the safe and orderly hosting of major events. These activities are undertaken
in coordination with concerned international and local government agencies, NGOs
and other concerned private individuals. They are often co-sponsored, planned and
executed jointly by public and private-sector interests across different government
jurisdictions by multiple agencies.
a. Classification of Major Events
1) International, National and Local Special Events. These are events
that involve a whole-of-government approach in ensuring safety
Chapter 3



112
and security to attain the desired objectives of the major event.
Any untoward incident that may transpire during these activities
could adversely affect the country in terms of its capability to
ensure safety and security.
a) International Events. These are events of international
significance being participated by heads of state/government,
ministers, senior officials, and representatives in the public or
private sectors. These events involve two or more nations
or those that cross beyond international boundaries such
as but not limited to the following: Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC) or Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) summits, conferences, meetings, and
sporting events.
b) National Events. These are events observed nationwide
that require multi-agency collaboration. These are events
that are within the boundaries of the country such as but not
limited to the State of the Nation Address (SONA), Philippine
Independence Day, Palarong Pambansa, Rizal Day and
Labor Day.
c) Local Special Events. These are events in a particular area
or place that also need a whole-of-government approach
such as but not limited to Panagbenga, Sinulog, Feast of the
Black Nazarene, Dinagyang, Ati-Atihan and events that are
frequented by foreign and local tourists.
2) Election/plebiscite/referendum. These events include the election
of public officers, and the people’s democratic exercise to approve
or reject an initiative on the constitution, or a legislation.
3) Presidential visits. These events involve all visits and engagements
of the president outside of Malacañan Palace.
4) Public assembly. It is a mass gathering of people such as
demonstration, march parade, procession or any other form of
mass or concerted action held in a public place for the purpose
of expressing political, economic, social or religious views and
opinions supporting policies of or petitioning the government for
Chapter 3



113
redress of grievances.
b. Creation of Joint Security Task Forces (STF)
1) Upon the issuance of an executive order from the national
government to create a National Organizing Committee (NOC),
the involved member agencies develop working plans for the
organization of different committees, which include the creation of
a joint STF.
2) The joint STF is headed by the CPNP or his/her authorized
representative as Commander. He shall be assisted by two
deputies, one from the AFP and the other from the PNP. The STF
shall be composed of three main Task Groups (TG): Security,
Peace and Order, and Emergency Preparedness and Response.
Different Site TGs and Site Sub-TGs shall likewise be formed
where the events are conducted (Annex “GG”).
3) The STF Commander shall be supported by the following staff:
Critical Incident Response Force (CIRF), STF Secretariat (Red
Team, Border Control, Diplomatic Liaison Team, PCTC/Interpol),
Multi-Agency Coordination Center (MACC), Intelligence Fusion
Center, SynchComm/Spokesperson and Finance and Logistics
Group.
4) During the planning stage, it shall be the responsibility of the
TG Commander to coordinate with other concerned government
agencies to designate a head of a particular sub-TG/TU.
5) For local special events, similar joint STFs shall likewise be created
preferably headed by the Regional Directror (RD) as the joint
Local Event STF (LESTF) Commander. He/she shall be assisted
by two deputies, one from the AFP and the other from the PNP.
He may require his/her Provincial Director (PD)/ City Director (CD)
to make the appropriate representation with the concerned LCE,
through the local POC, for the passing of a resolution or issuance
of the local executive order creating the LESTF. In the absence of
a resolution/order, the RD shall initiate the creation of the LESTF,
in coordination with other involved agencies.
6) For other sporting events affecting only a particular locality, such
as the Federation of International Basketball Association (FIBA),
Chapter 3



114
the site TG or LESTF shall be created, preferably headed by the
RD who shall exercise overall operational control and supervision
over involved NSUs and other agencies.
7) The creation of sub-TGs and Task Units (TUs) provided in Rule
5.1d to f shall be dependent on the required tasks that shall be
provided at the identified sites where the meetings and other
activities are to be conducted.
8) For national events, the PNP shall provide the appropriate
security coverage under the overall supervision of CPNP or his/
her authorized representative at the national level, while the RDs
and their subordinate Unit Commanders shall act as the Officers
Primarily Responsible (OPR) for securing the events affecting their
respective jurisdictions, in coordination with other local security
and law enforcement agencies.
9) For elections, plebiscites or referendums, the establishment of
COMELEC checkpoints and other intensified law enforcement
operations shall be guided by the procedures in the conduct of joint
checkpoints in Rule 2.2f of this POP and COMELEC issuances.
10) For presidential visits, the PNP, in coordination with the Presidential
Security Group (PSG), AFP and other concerned government
agencies, shall provide the necessary security coverage in all
areas of his/her engagement in the country.
c. Procedures in the Establishment and Operationalization of Multi-Agency
Coordinating Center
1) The STF/LESTF Commander or his/her authorized representative
shall be responsible in coordinating with the event organizing
committee for the establishment of the MACC;
2) The STF/LESTF Commander shall designate a MACC Commander
who will be assisted by a Battle Captain who works 24/7. The
MACC shall be complemented by a security force;
3) The MACC shall be established in the nearest strategic location
to where a particular event is held, preferably with available
communication signal;
Chapter 3



115
4) All involved PNP units and agencies shall ensure the detail of their
respective action officers and communicators to the MACC to
facilitate coordination;
5) The Battle Captain may either be designated permanently until
the termination of the event or on rotation basis from among
the list of PCOs who have undergone the appropriate capability
enhancement training or seminar during the security planning and
preparation stages;
6) The Battle Captain shall be in charge of synchronizing and
integrating the daily activities and operations at the MACC of all
representatives of the different tasked units/agencies; and
7) Specifically, the Battle Captain monitors the movement of delegates/
participants and status of the actual deployment of involved TUs.
He/she assesses and analyzes all information and concerns and
relays it to the concerned units/agencies for appropriate action.
d. Procedures to be undertaken by the Commander, TG Security
1) Secure the delegates and participants in all areas of engagement
during their stay in the country by providing appropriate airport,
close-in, convoy, onboard, route, billet, venue and area security
packages;
2) Organize and establish a TG Secretariat to monitor all the activities
of the sub-TGs;
3) Coordinate and liaise with concerned agencies for information
concerning the itineraries and other requirements of delegates
and participants for the provision of their appropriate security;
4) Conduct training, exercises (tabletop, CommEx, SimEx, CerEx,
MarEx, etc), walkthrough, dry runs and contingency planning at
the identified engagement areas for familiarization and capability
enhancement of the involved units/agencies;
5) Activate the financial and logistical sub-TG to provide all logistical
and financial requirements of the TG in coordination with the
committee on budget and fiscal; and
Chapter 3



116
6) Organize and provide support to the following sub-TGs:
a) Sub-TG on heads of state/government security – the PSG
is designated as lead agency that shall have overall and
exclusive responsibility for their 24/7 protection, as well as
their immediate family members;
b) Sub-TG on delegates security – responsible for the overall
protection of all delegates and VIPs other than the heads of
state/government. It shall organize the following task units
(TU):
(1) TU airport security – responsible for airport security
coverage to all the VIPs, delegates and their parties
within the airport premises and its environs;
(2) TU close-in security – responsible for the 24/7 executive
protection for VIPs other than the heads of state/
government, their spouses and family;
(3) TU convoy security – responsible for the protection of
VIPs other than the heads of state/government, their
spouses and family during land movements;
(4) TU route security – responsible for the road-side
security along convoy routes;
(5) TU billet security – responsible for the security of hotels/
billet areas of delegates/participants; and
(6) TU area security – responsible for the land, air and
maritime security in support to the sub-TG heads of
state/government and sub-TG delegates security;
c) Sub-TG on technical capability and anti-intrusion – responsible
for the countermeasure techniques/anti-intrusion system;
d) Sub-TG on diplomatic security – responsible for the security
liaising of the diplomatic missions, security officers of
the heads of state/government and other VIPs to ensure
synchronized and coordinative applications and delivery of
public safety and security services;
Chapter 3



117
e) Sub-TG on intel operations – responsible for real time
intelligence and counter-intelligence requirements needed
before, during and after the event.
e. Procedures to be undertaken by the Commander, TG Peace and Order
1) Ensure peace and order in the working and general environment
in all sites where the meetings and other activities are conducted
through sustained and extensive inter-agency anti-criminality
campaigns, traffic management, public order, internal security
operations, maritime operations, air defense and other related
campaigns to negate threats or disruptions to the major event;
2) Organize and provide support to the following sub-TGs:
a) Sub-TG on Air Operations and Defense – responsible for the
detection of hostile aircraft and air defense capability;
b) Sub-TG on Community Relations – responsible for the
development and maintainance of a strong mutually
beneficial relationship with the community;
c) Sub-TG on Critical Infrastructure Security – responsible for the
protection and security of all transportation, communication,
power systems, and critical infrastructure;
d) Sub-TG on Cyber IT/Radio Communications – responsible for
the provision of a secured information and smooth operations
of communications technology, information systems and
resources to support efficient and accessible IT services to
both foreign and local delegates;
e) Sub-TG on Tourist Protection – responsible for the promotion
of security and safety of VIPs and delegates who may visit
certain tourist destination and business areas. They shall
be in-charge of securing the ports, airports, bus terminals/
stations and other jump-off points leading to these areas;
f) Sub-TG on Anti-Criminality – responsible for intensified law
enforcement operations;
Chapter 3



118
g) Sub-TG on Internal Security – responsible for intensified
internal security operations;
h) Sub-TG on Maritime Security – responsible for intensified
maritime/coastal security operations;
i) Sub-TG on Site Security – responsible for the protection of
the engagement area before and during the meetings and
activities;
j) Sub-TG on Traffic Management – responsible for efficient
movement of convoys along routes of the delegates;
k) Sub-TG on Protective Technical Service/EOD-K9 –
responsible for bomb/IED detection, controlled detonation,
and disposal operations;
l) Sub-TG on Public Order – responsible for CDM operations;
f. Procedures to be Undertaken by the Commander, TG Emergency
Preparedness and Response
1) Orchestrate efforts of all NDRRMC member agencies in the
preparation and overall emergency preparedness and response
for all natural calamity scenarios in all engagement areas, including
storm surges, power outage, disruption of services and utilities,
airport incidents and other emergencies;
2) Lead the consequence management efforts in the event of a
terrorist attack, rallies and protest actions and other humaninduced incidents;
3) Capacitate local DRRMCs through training, rehearsals, simulation
exercises and contingency planning sessions, including the
organization and equipage of local responder groups that will be
deployed;
4) Provide periodic warning, alerts and advisories for the member
agencies, the chairmen of the committee and the STF commander
for subsequent information to NOC and committees for their
appropriate information as basis for planning and simultaneously
Chapter 3



119
conducting prevention and preparations and eventual
implementation of contingency plans;
5) Attend to the emergency medical requirements of the heads of
states/government and their delegation and other conference
delegations in all engagement areas;
6) Lead the prevention, risk reduction and consequence management
of Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear And Explosives
(CBRNE) scenario;
7) Organize and provide support to the following Sub TGs:
a) Sub-TG on Disaster Risk Reduction and Management –
responsible for disaster risk reduction and management,
as well as the organization, training and equipping
of at least three responder units depending on the risk
assessment in respective localities. It shall be composed of,
but not limited to, the following TUs:
(1) TU Search and Rescue – responsible for the conduct
of search and rescue, and evacuation of delegates
and participants in case of emergencies resulting from
natural calamity and/or human-induced disaster;
(2) TU Medical Emergency Management – responsible
for prompt medical attention to all delegates and
participants, including management of the dead, in
case of emergencies resulting from natural calamity
and/or human-induced disaster;
(3) TU CBRNE – responsible for any CBRNE prevention,
risk reduction and consequence management;
(4) TU Fire – responsible for the response to emergencies
and rescue of delegates and participants threatened by
fire incidents; and
(5) TU Evacuation Management – responsible for
managing the evacuees who are delegates and
Chapter 3



120
participants, including management of the missing, in
case of emergencies resulting from natural calamity
and/or human-induced disaster.
b) Sub-TG on Fire Safety - responsible for fire safety compliance
of all proposed venues.
5.2 Police Assistance During the Implementation of Orders or Decisions
from Courts, Quasi-Judicial or Administrative Bodies
The request for police assistance shall be submitted to the Office of the CPNP
in case the final decision or order to be implemented is rendered by the Supreme
Court, the Court of Appeals, the Court of Tax Appeals, the Sandiganbayan, QuasiJudicial Bodies or Administrative Bodies.
If the final decision or order is rendered by the Regional Trial Court (RTC)
or the Municipal Trial Court (MTC), the request shall be submitted to the Office of
the RD of the PRO having territorial jurisdiction over the place of implementation.
The request for police assistance of quasi-judicial or administrative bodies
shall be submitted to the Office of the CPNP regardless of the place where the
police assistance shall be rendered, but the same may be delegated to the Regional
Director upon the discretion of the CPNP in accordance with Section 26, RA 6975.
Request for police assistance in the implementation of final decisions/
orders/writs shall be acted only, upon compliance of the following conditions:
•	 The request for police assistance is based on an order of the court,
quasi-judicial or administrative bodies;
•	 The written request for police assistance shall be signed by the Sheriff or
equivalent officer in quasi-judicial or administrative bodies;
•	 The request is filed at least five working days prior to the actual
implementation; and
•	 The original document of the final decision/order/resolution must be
presented. In the absence of the same, a copy duly authenticated by
the Clerk of Court or other authorized representative of the court, quasijudicial or administrative body will suffice.
Chapter 3



121
a. During Labor Disputes
1) General Policy and Guidelines
a) The involvement of PNP personnel during strikes, lockouts and
labor disputes in general shall be limited to the maintenance
of peace and order, enforcement of laws, and implementation
of legal orders of the duly constituted authorities.
b) In case of actual violence, the police can respond without the
written request.
c) No PNP personnel shall be allowed to render police
assistance in connection with a strike or lockout if there is
question or complaint as regards his/her relationship by
affinity or consanguinity to any official/leader of the parties
in the controversy or if he has financial or pecuniary interest
therein.
d) PNP personnel detailed as peace-keeping force in strike or
lockout areas shall wear the prescribed police uniform.
e) They shall exercise maximum tolerance and when called for
by the situation or when all other peaceful and non-violent
means have been exhausted, police officers may employ
such means as may be necessary and reasonable to prevent
or repel an aggression.
f) The matter of determining whether a strike, picket or lockout
is legal or not should be left to Department of Labor and
Employment (DOLE) and its appropriate agencies. PNP
personnel should not interfere in a strike, picket or lockout,
except as herein provided.
g) No personal escort shall be provided to any of the parties
to the controversy unless upon written request from DOLE.
Whenever escorts are to be provided, the other party shall
be informed accordingly. All escorts shall be in prescribed
uniform.
Chapter 3



122
h) During the pendency of a strike/lockout, the police personnel
concerned are prohibited from socializing with any of the
parties involved in the controversy.
i) Liaison shall be established and maintained with the
representatives of DOLE, management and the union in the
strike/lockout area for the purpose of maintaining peace and
order, as well as to maintain a continuing peaceful dialogue
between the parties to the strike/lockout.
j) The peace-keeping detail shall establish a command post
outside the 50-meter radius from the picket line. A PCO shall
be designated as Head/Commander of the peace keeping
force that will be responsible for the command and control of
the detailed personnel. The members of the peacekeeping
detail shall stay outside a 50-meter radius from the picket
line. However, in cases wherein the 50-meter radius includes
a public thoroughfare, they may station themselves in such
public thoroughfare to ensure that the flow of traffic will be
unhampered.
2) Applicable Legal Parameters
The pertinent provisions of the Public Assembly Act of 1985
(Batas Pambansa 880), the Labor Code of the Philippines, as amended
and other applicable laws, shall be observed during rallies, strikes,
demonstrations or other public assemblies. Law enforcement agents
shall, at all times:
a) Exercise maximum tolerance;
b) In case of unlawful aggression, only reasonable force may
be employed to prevent or repel it;
c) The employment of tear gas and water cannons shall be
made under the control and supervision of the Ground
Commander; and
d) No arrest of any leader, organizer, or participant shall be
made during the public assembly, unless he/she violates any
pertinent law as evidence warrants.
Chapter 3



123
3) Service of Lawful Orders or Writ
The service of DOLE, court, or other lawful orders or writs is the
primary concern of the DOLE representative, sheriff, and representative
of the government agency issuing the order, when specifically stated
and requested in the order or writ, shall the PNP enforce such orders
or writs.
4) Prohibited Labor Activities
No personnel of the PNP shall:
a) Bring in, introduce, or escort in any manner, any individual
who seeks to replace strikers in entering or leaving the
premises or a strike area; or
b) Work in replacement of the strikers.
5) Obstruction During Pickets and Lock Downs
The ingress or egress of an establishment is not part of a strike or
picket area. If the picket or lock down causes obstruction, the PNP must
first exert all peaceful means to clear the obstruction before resorting to
crowd dispersal.
b. During Enforcement of Demolition and Ejectment Orders
1) Role of the PNP in the Enforcement of a Demolition and/or
Ejectment Order
a) Police assistance in the enforcement or implementation of
a demolition or ejectment order shall be granted only upon
a written request of the Sheriff or equivalent officer in quasijudicial and administrative bodies accompanied by a valid order
issued by a competent court, quasi-judicial or administrative
body and, when required, with written permission from the
Local Housing Board in accordance with Executive Order
(EO) 708 amending EO 152 and Department of Interior and
Local Government (DILG) Memo Circular No. 2008-143. The
proponent shall only be provided with police assistance upon
Chapter 3



124
presentation of Certification from the Local Housing Board
that requirements under RA 7279 are complied with for urban
areas. Moreover, said police assistance shall be coordinated
with the concerned LCE before its enforcement. In no case
shall a demolition involving informal settlers be effected
without a pre-demolition conference with the presence of all
parties involved.
b) The conduct of pre-demolition conference in cases where
the affected families are informal settlers shall be mandatory
before the provision of police assistance.
c) The duties of PNP personnel in any demolition or ejectment
activity shall be limited to the maintenance of peace and
order, protection of life and property, and enforcement of
laws and legal orders.
d) PNP personnel tasked to provide police assistance shall be
in prescribed uniform during the actual demolition. They shall
be limited only to occupying the first line of law enforcement
and civil disturbance control; shall not participate in the
physical dismantling of any structure subject of demolition;
and shall use only necessary and reasonable force.
2) Procedures in the Enforcement of a Demolition and/or Ejectment
Order
a) Risk and threat assessment shall be conducted;
b) PNP personnel should be informed of the prevailing situation
and their tasks;
c) Strict observance of Human Rights must be adhered;
d) As much as practicable, the COP shall lead the PNP
contingent detailed to assist the Sheriff or equivalent officer
during the demolition/ejectment activity;
e) All PNP personnel involved shall desist from the use of any
unnecessary force or any act that may harm, harass, or
terrorize the affected parties;
Chapter 3



125
f) The mode of participation shall be limited to the maintenance
of peace and order during the entire demolition/ejectment
activity, ensuring the protection of all parties from harm and
injury;
g) Tear gas, water cannons, and reasonable force shall be used
only when all other peaceful and non-violent means have
been exhausted;
h) Any PNP member whose families are affected with the
demolition or ejectment shall adhere to the order issued by
competent authority. In no case shall a PNP member intervene
during the implementation of such order or enforcement of
demolition and/or ejectment; and
i) The COP shall ensure the presence of fire and medical teams
in the activity area.
c. During Implementation of Final Decisions or Orders of the Courts in
Civil Cases, of Quasi-judicial Bodies and of Administrative Bodies within
their Jurisdiction
1) Police Assistance in the Implementation of Final Decisions or
Orders or Resolutions of the Courts in Civil Cases, of QuasiJudicial Bodies and of Administrative Bodies, (Except Cases with
Issued Temporary Restraining Order or Injunction)
All requests for police assistance regardless of which courts,
quasi-judicial bodies or administrative bodies render the final decision
or order shall be submitted to the RD of the PRO where the police
assistance will be rendered.
2) Requirements for Police Assistance
Request for police assistance in the implementation of final
decisions/orders/writs shall be acted only, upon compliance of the
following conditions:
a) The request for police assistance is based on an order of the
court, quasi-judicial or administrative bodies;
Chapter 3



126
b) The written request for police assistance including a
certification shall be signed by the Sheriff or equivalent officer
in quasi-judicial or administrative bodies;
c) The request is filed at least five working days prior to the
actual implementation; and
d) The original document of the final decision/order/resolution
must be presented. In the absence of the same, a copy
duly authenticated by the Clerk of Court or other authorized
representative of the court, quasi-judicial or administrative
body will suffice.
3) Period to Render Police Assistance
If the requirements have been satisfied, police assistance shall be
rendered within three working days from receipt of the directive from
the CPNP or RD, PRO. Unless a specific period is written in the order
or due to inherent impossibility of rendering assistance, a longer period
may be required.
4) Office or Unit That May Be Tasked to Render Police Assistance
The CPNP, as may be recommended by The Director for Operations
(TDO), may task any operational support unit of the PNP or the PRO
that has jurisdiction in the area where the decision/order/resolution shall
be implemented to render police assistance.
In case of request to the RD, PRO, the latter may task PNP
Mobile Forces, City Police Office/Station (CPS) or Municipal Police
Station (MPS) within his/her jurisdiction to render police assistance.
For requests filed directly to the LPUs or operational support units, the
same shall be referred to the CPNP or RD, PRO, as appropriate. No
police assistance shall be rendered until the CPNP or RD, PRO shall
have acted on the request.
5) Extent of Police Assistance
The Head of Office or Unit tasked to render police assistance
shall have the discretion to employ sufficient number of PNP uniformed
personnel after taking into consideration the importance of the case,
the scope of the resistance to be encountered, if there is any, and the
Chapter 3



127
general peace and order condition in the area. Unless a higher ranking
officer is necessary and more PNP personnel shall be required, the
police team that will render police assistance shall be led by a PCO with
the rank of at least a Police Captain. All the team members shall be in
prescribed uniform while rendering assistance
6) Role of PNP Personnel Rendering Police Assistance
PNP personnel shall observe maximum tolerance and respect for
human rights at all times. Dialogue with those who may be affected
by the implementation of the decision/order/resolution is encouraged
to prevent violence, and the assistance of local public officials, when
warranted, should be requested. However, the Sheriff or the equivalent
officer of quasi-judicial or administrative bodies shall have the final
disposition whether to proceed with the implementation of the decision/
order/resolution or not. The use of reasonable force shall only be
resorted for self-defense and in defense of strangers. The role of the PNP
shall be limited to the maintenance of peace and order, crowd control,
and the security of the Sheriff or equivalent officer of quasi-judicial or
administrative body. In no case shall PNP personnel participate in the
implementation of the decision/order/resolution by performing acts not
herein mentioned, such as, but not limited to, dismantling, hauling of
personal property and other analogous acts.
d. During the Implementation of Final Decisions or Orders or Resolutions
of the COMELEC or DILG or Local Government Unit Exercising
Disciplinary Powers in Administrative Cases of Elected Officials
1) Requirements for the Request for Police Assistance
The police assistance shall only be granted upon the written request
of COMELEC or DILG, accompanied with the original or authenticated
copy of the final decision or order or resolution to be implemented. A
Special Task Group shall be created for this purpose.
2) Period to Render Police Assistance
If the requirements have been satisfied, police assistance shall be
rendered within three working days from receipt of the directive from the
CPNP. Unless a specific period is written in the order or due to inherent
impossibility of rendering assistance, a longer period may be required.
Chapter 3



128
3) Extent of Police Assistance
The Special Task Group Commander tasked to render police
assistance shall have the discretion to employ enough PNP uniformed
personnel after taking into consideration the threat and risk assessment.
All members of the Special Task Group shall be in prescribed uniform
when rendering police assistance.
4) Role of PNP Personnel Rendering Police Assistance
The role of the PNP when rendering police assistance shall be
limited to the maintenance of peace and order, crowd control, and the
security of the duly authorized officer of the DILG, COMELEC or the
LGU who has the responsibility in implementing the decision/order/
resolution. The aforementioned duly authorized officer shall have the
final disposition whether to proceed or not with the implementation.
No PNP personnel shall participate in the implementation by
performing acts, such as, but not limited to, dismantling, hauling of
personal property and other analogous acts. The PNP personnel shall
at all times respect human rights, observe maximum tolerance and
exercise utmost impartiality and neutrality. The use of reasonable force
shall only be resorted for self-defense and in defense of strangers.
e. During the Implementation of Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program
(CARP)
1) Coverage of Police Assistance
a) Preliminary Agrarian Activities
(1) Land survey
(2) Field Investigation
(3) Ocular Inspection
(4) Meeting between actual and potential agrarian reform
beneficiaries
(5) Post Installation
(6) Landholding tagging
(7) Analogous cases
Chapter 3



129
b) Implementation of Final Orders
(1) Final Orders/Resolutions /Decisions Issued by
Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR)
(2) Order of Installation or Certificate of Land Ownership
Award (CLOA)
2) Requirements in the Granting of Police Assistance
Police assistance in the implementation of CARP shall be provided
only as requested by DAR, duly approved by the CPNP or RD,PRO.
a) Police assistance during the conduct of preliminary agrarian
activities as provided in Rule 5.2e1)(a) shall be rendered
only upon a written request submitted by the Agrarian
Reform Officer (ARO) or any authorized Officer of DAR,
accompanied with the original or authenticated copy of the
order issued for the activity. The request shall be submitted
to the Office of the RD of the PRO having jurisdiction over the
area of execution for his/her approval.
b) Police assistance in the implementation of final orders,
decisions, resolutions or CLOAs issued DAR shall be
rendered only upon a written request submitted by the ARO
or any authorized officer of DAR, accompanied with the
original or authenticated copy of the final decision, order or
CLOA to be implemented. The request and its attachments,
regardless of the place of execution, shall be submitted to
the Office of the CPNP for his/her approval.
3) Extent of Police Assistance
The head of office or unit tasked to render police assistance shall
have the discretion to employ enough PNP uniformed personnel after
taking into consideration the threat and risk assessment. The police
assistance shall be led by a PCO. All involved PNP personnel shall be
in prescribed uniform when rendering police assistance.
Chapter 3



130
4) Role of PNP Personnel Rendering Police Assistance
The role of the PNP when rendering police assistance shall be
limited to the maintenance of peace and order, crowd control, and the
security of the duly authorized officer of the DAR who has the responsibility
in implementing the decision/order/resolution/CLOA or leading the
conduct of the preliminary agrarian activity. The aforementioned duly
authorized officer shall have the final disposition whether to proceed or
not with the implementation.
No PNP member shall participate in the implementation of the
decision/order/resolution/CLOA or in the conduct of any of the preliminary
agrarian activities. The PNP personnel shall always respect human
rights, observe maximum tolerance and exercise utmost impartiality
and neutrality. The use of reasonable force shall only be resorted for
self-defense and in defense of strangers.
5) When Entry to the Property is Refused by the Landowner
In the implementation of final orders or in the conduct of preliminary
agrarian activities, the authority to break into the property or into
a building shall be specifically provided in the order/resolution to be
implemented. Original or authenticated copy of such shall be attached
in the written request for police assistance and the authority to break
into subject property shall be specified.
Likewise, the authority of the implementing team to forcibly break
out and liberate themselves in case denied exit from the property shall
also be specified in the order/resolution.
When the DAR implementing team is denied entry into the property,
the PNP personnel shall not directly participate in the conduct of forcible
entry into the said property.
f. During the Implementation of Decisions/Orders of the Court, Quasijudicial or Administrative Bodies that are Immediately Executory
1) This rule sets forth the procedure in the granting of police assistance
in the implementation of decisions/orders that are immediately
executory such as, but not limited to the following:
a) Temporary Restraining Order
Chapter 3



131
b) Writ of Preliminary Injunction
c) Replevin
d) Writ of Preliminary Attachment
e) Receivership
f) Provisional Remedies under the Human Security Act
g) Temporary Protection Order under the Anti-Violence Against
Women and their Children Act
h) Protection Order under the Anti-Child Pornography Act; and
i) Analogous cases
2) Where to File
Decisions/Orders issued by the court, quasi-judicial or administrative
bodies that are immediately executory shall be submitted to the RD of
the PRO having jurisdiction of the place where the decision/order shall
be implemented. Given the urgency of the matter, the RD, PRO shall
be the approving authority. The request for police assistance, however,
shall only be acted, upon the submission of the written request of the
Sheriff or equivalent officer in quasi-judicial or administrative bodies,
accompanied by the original or authenticated copy of the decision/
order/writ sought to be implemented.
3) Role of PNP Personnel Rendering Police Assistance
PNP personnel shall always observe maximum tolerance and
respect for human rights. Dialogue with those who may be affected
by the implementation of the decision/order/resolution is encouraged
to prevent violence. The assistance of local public officials, when
warranted, should be requested. However, the Sheriff or the equivalent
officer of quasi-judicial or administrative bodies shall have the final
disposition whether to proceed or not with the implementation. The
use of reasonable force shall only be resorted for self-defense and in
defense of strangers.
Chapter 3



132
Rule 6 Investigation Operations
6.1 Conduct of Crime Scene Investigation
The CSI starts from the arrival of the PNP First Responders (FRs) to the
arrival of the Duty Investigator/ IOC and the SOCO-LS Team until the lifting
of the security cordon and release of the crime scene. (Standard Operating
Procedure No. ODIDM-2011-008 “Conduct of Crime Scene Investigation”)
a. Specific Functions, Responsibilities and Procedures
The following are the functions and responsibilities of the investigators
during the CSI, as well as the procedures to be observed:
1) First Responders
a) Assess whether the situation still poses imminent danger
and call for back up if necessary.
b) Immediately conduct a preliminary evaluation of the crime
scene. This evaluation should include the scope of the
incident, emergency services required, scene safety
concerns, administration of life-saving measures, and
establishment of security and control of the scene;
c) Promptly inform the immediate commander on any updates
of the situation;
d) Save and preserve lives by giving the necessary first-aid
measures to the injured and their medical evacuation as
necessary. They shall likewise secure and preserve the crime
scene by cordoning off the area to prevent unauthorized
entry of persons;
e) Take the dying declaration or statement of severely injured
person/s. (Annex “HH”).
f) Make the initial assessment on whether a crime has actually
been committed and shall conduct the preliminary interview
Chapter 3



133
of persons of interest and witnesses to determine what and
how the crime was committed;
g) Arrest the suspect if present in the area; and
h) Turnover the crime scene to the duty investigator/IOC upon
his/her arrival after he/she has been briefed of the situation.
The FR shall prepare and submit the First Responders
Report (Annex “II”) to the IOC and assist him/her until the
investigation is completed and temporarily turned over to the
local COP for the continuance of crime scene security.
2) Investigator-On-Case (IOC)
a) Make a thorough assessment of the crime scene based on
the briefing of the FR;
b) Assume full control and responsibility over the crime scene
and conduct inquiry into the incident. If necessary, the IOC
may extend the search outside of the crime scene;
c) Request SOCO assistance from the PNP CL office through the
station TOC if required (PNP Investigation Manual, 2011). If
not, he/she may proceed with the CSI ensuring observance of
the procedures in the collection and preservation of evidence
and accomplishing CSI forms including Persons who entered
the Crime Scene, Significant Persons Present at the Vicinity
of the Crime Scene, Evidence Log, Crime Scene Sketch and
Inventory of Evidence Collected (Annexes “JJ”,“JJ-1”, “JJ-2”,
“JJ-3” and “JJ-4”).
d) Present the written Request for the Conduct of SOCO (Annex
“KK”) to the SOCO TL. The SOCO Team shall not process
the crime scene unless the request has been received
indicating that the concerned police unit shall remain and
provide all the necessary security and support to the SOCO
Team during the whole process until after the crime scene is
released; and
e) Brief the SOCO TL upon their arrival at the crime scene and
jointly conduct the preliminary crime scene survey.
Chapter 3



134
f) Coordinate with the PNP Legal Service for the filing of
appropriate motion for the release and disposition of submitted
evidence after the case is dismissed at the Prosecutor’s
Office or terminated or resolved by the Court.
3) SOCO
a) Respond only upon request through the Operations Center
and after the IOC has already made the proper assessment
of the crime scene. The SOCO Team shall not join any
operations conducted by the local police or accompany the
FRs or the IOC in going to the crime scene;
b) Conduct SOCO upon receipt of the request from the
concerned police unit;
c) Turn over the crime scene to the IOC/COP for security of
the area, in case the SOCO Team temporarily suspends
the processing. The COP shall be primarily responsible and
accountable for securing the crime scene and ensuring its
integrity until the return of SOCO Team and the conclusion
of the CSI;
d) Perform the final crime scene survey together with the IOC
and thereafter provide the IOC the initial results of the crime
scene processing; and
e) Accomplish the Inventory of Evidence Collected Form
(Annex “JJ-4”) and furnish the IOC of copies of the same
before leaving the crime scene.
4) Legal Officer
a) Make a determination through searching questions to
the COP if the crime reported falls within the definition of
Sensational Crime or Serious Election Related Incident (ERI)
under PNP MC 2013-004.
b) Go to the crime scene involving Sensational Crime and
Serious ERI and ensure that the applicable laws, rules and
regulations during the CSI are observed.
Chapter 3



135
c) Provide the necessary legal assistance in the preparation
of complaint, affidavits and other pleadings that will be filed
before the prosecutor’s office.
b. Special SOCO Procedures
In cases where the evidence gathered needs special processing due
to significant or sensational cases, the specialists from the CL shall be
requested.
1) In bombing cases, the EOD personnel should first clear the area
prior to entry of the SOCO Team. The preliminary survey and crime
scene processing shall be jointly conducted by EOD personnel,
IOC and SOCO Team. All evidence collected must be pre-cleared
by the EOD Team prior to disposition;
2) In suspected or reported chemical, biological, radiological or
nuclear (CBRN) situations, the SOCO shall directly coordinate
with the Special Rescue Team of the BFP and other appropriate
government agencies.
3) In mass victim situation, the Regional/District SOCO who has
jurisdiction over the area, in addition to their function, shall act
as the FR to the Interim Disaster Victim Identification Task Group
(IDVITG) of the PNP CL. The IDVITG shall immediately assess
the forensic specialists needed to be deployed at the crime scene
and relay the requirements to the PNP CL Headquarters.
4) The SOCO, in coordination with IOC, has motu proprio authority to
direct all operating units involved in the police operation to submit
their respective personnel for forensic examination, their service
firearms for ballistic tests and other pieces of evidence involved to
expedite the investigation of the case.
c. Policy Guidelines on Processing of Persons Present at the Crime Scene
during Post-Incident Situations
These policy guidelines prescribe the operational procedures in
processing and handling persons present at the crime scene, be they the
suspects, victims or witnesses. The aim is to clearly define police courses
Chapter 3



136
of actions in dealing with persons who, for any reason and personal
circumstance, are at the crime scene during post-incident situations.
As soon as the perpetrators surrender, or when they are captured or
arrested, the IC shall ensure that the following are accomplished:
1) Processing, Debriefing and Documentation:
a) Victims;
b) Perpetrators;
c) Witnesses; and
d) Key participants in the incident.
2) Venue of Processing, Debriefing and Documentation – Considering
the instability of the situation, the safety of the responders and
persons found at the scene of the crime, and the preservation of
the place of incident, the venue of the processing, debriefing and
investigation shall be at a neutral and secured place.
d. Release of the Crime Scene
1) The IOC shall decide on the release of the crime scene upon
consultation with the SOCO Team Leader. He/she shall ensure
that all pieces of potential evidence have been collected and
appropriately documented. Any re-entry of the IOC or other
investigative units into the crime scene after its release to the
owner will require a Search Warrant issued by the Court;
2) The IOC shall accomplish the IOC/Investigator’s CSI form (Annex
“LL”) before the cordon shall be lifted;
3) The IOC or the COP shall turn-over the crime scene to the owner
of the property or where the crime scene is a public place, to any
local person in authority using the Release of the Crime Scene
Form (Annex “MM”);
4) The IOC shall accomplish and submit the Investigator’s Report
with all the required attachments to the COP within two days if
practicable from the date of incident; and
Chapter 3



137
5) The CSI Report shall be the first entry in the Case Folder for the
investigation of the incident.
6.2 Maintenance of Police Blotter
a. Police Blotter
Each PNP operating unit/station shall maintain two separate police
blotters:
1) Blue Blotter. Contains the daily registry of all crime incident reports,
official summaries of arrest, and other significant events reported
in a Police Station/Unit; and
2) Pink Blotter. Contains the daily registry of all crime incident reports
involving Violence Against Women and Children, Trafficking in
Person, and other Gender-Based Violence such as those provided
for in PNP policies and Philippine laws.
b. Blotter Procedure
Crime incidents, arrests or events/activities shall be recorded in the
blotter book by the DO.
If the report is a crime incident as verified by the DI, he/she shall
accomplish the Incident Record Form (IRF) (Annex “NN”) using Crime
Information Reporting and Analysis System (CIRAS) from which the entry
in the blotter book shall be extracted from.
If the incident falls under the jurisdiction of the Katarungang
Pambarangay, it shall al be recorded but indicated in disposition as referred
to Barangay.
If the crime incident involves Children in Conflict with the Law (CICL),
always use a.k.a. or aliases when writing entries to blue blotter.
6.3 Judicial Affidavit Rule (A.M. No. 12-8-8-SC)
This Rule shall apply to all actions, proceedings, and incidents requiring
the reception of evidence before the court in place of the direct testimonies of
witnesses in order to reduce the time needed for completing their testimonies.
Chapter 3



138
a. Application of Rule to Criminal Actions
This rule shall apply to all criminal actions where the maximum imposable
penalty does not exceed six years.
b. Contents of Judicial Affidavit (Annex “OO”)
A Judicial Affidavit shall be prepared in the language known to the
witness and, if not in English or Filipino, accompanied by a translation in
English or Filipino, and shall contain the necessary data/information.
1) The name, age, residence or business address, and occupation
of the witness;
2) The name and address of the lawyer who conducts or supervises
the examination of the witness and the place where the examination
is being held;
3) A statement that the witness is answering the questions asked of
him/her, fully conscious that he/she does so under oath, and that
he/she may face criminal liability for false testimony or perjury;
4) Questions asked of the witness and his/her corresponding
answers, consecutively numbered, that:
a) Show the circumstances under which the witness acquired
the facts upon which he/she testifies;
b) Elicit from him/her those facts which are relevant to the
issues that the case presents; and
c) Identify the attached documentary and object evidence and
establish their authenticity in accordance with the Rules of
Court;
5) The signature of the witness over his/her printed name; and
6) A jurat or a proof that an oath was taken before an Administering
officer or a notary public.
Chapter 3



139
c. Sworn Attestation of the Lawyer
The judicial affidavit shall contain a sworn attestation at the end,
executed by the lawyer who conducted or supervised the examination of the
witness, to the effect that:
1) He/she faithfully recorded or caused to be recorded the questions
he/she asked and the corresponding answers that the witness
gave; and
2) Neither he/she nor any other person then present or assisting him/
her coached the witness regarding the latter’s answers.
6.4 Custodial Investigation
a. Duties of the Police during Custodial Investigation (RA 7438 sec. 2)
1) The arresting officer, or the investigator, as the case may be,
shall ensure that a person arrested, detained or under custodial
investigation shall, at all times, be assisted by counsel, preferably
of his own choice;
2) The arresting officer, or the investigator, as the case may be,
must inform the person arrested, detained or under custodial
investigation of the following rights under RA 7438 and RA 9745
in a language or dialect known to and understood by him/her, that:
a) He/she has the right to remain silent. If he/she waives his/her
right to remain silent, anything he/she says can be used in
evidence against him/her in court;
b) He/she has the right to counsel of his/her own choice. If
he/she cannot afford one, he/she shall be provided with an
independent and competent counsel;
c) He/she has the right to demand physical examination by an
independent and competent doctor of his/her own choice,
before and after interview/questioning. If the person arrested
is a female, she shall be attended to preferably by a female
doctor. If he/she cannot afford one, he/she shall be provided
Chapter 3



140
with a competent and independent doctor to conduct physical
examination;
d) The State shall endeavour to provide him/her with
psychological evaluation if available under the circumstances
(RA 9745 sec. 12).
e) He/she, including his/her immediate family, have the right to
immediate access to proper and adequate medical treatment;
and
f) He/she has the right to be informed of such rights.
3) If the person arrested, detained, or under custodial investigation
opted to give a sworn statement (Annex “PP”), the arresting officer,
or the investigator, as the case may be, must reduce it in writing
and in the presence of his/her counsel.
4) The arresting officer must ensure that, before the sworn statement
is signed, or thumb marked, if there is inability to read and to
write, the document shall be read and adequately explained to the
person arrested, detained or under custodial investigation by his/
her counsel of choice, or by the assisting counsel provided to him/
her, in the language or dialect known to him/her;
5) The arresting officer, or the investigator, as the case may be,
must ensure that any extrajudicial confession made by a person
arrested, detained or under custodial investigation shall be:
a) In writing;
b) Signed by such person in the presence of his/her counsel; or
c) In the latter’s absence, upon a valid waiver, and in the
presence of any of the parents, elder brothers and sisters,
his/her spouse, the municipal mayor, the municipal judge,
district school supervisor, priest, imam or religious minister
chosen by him/her.
Chapter 3



141
Failure of the arresting officer, or the investigator, to observe the
above-mentioned procedures shall render the extrajudicial confession
inadmissible as evidence in any proceeding; and
6) The arresting officer, or the investigator, as the case may be, must,
under established regulations, allow the person arrested, detained,
or under custodial investigation visits by or conferences with any
member of his/her immediate family, any medical doctor, priest,
imam or religious minister chosen by him/her or by any member
of his/her immediate family or by his/her counsel, or by any local
NGO duly accredited by the Commission on Human Rights (CHR)
or by any international NGO duly accredited by the Office of the
President. His/her “immediate family” shall include his/her spouse,
parent or child, brother or sister, grandparent or grandchild, uncle
or aunt, nephew or niece, guardian or ward, and fiancé or fiancée
(RA 7438 sec. 2 f) ;
b. Persons Under Police Custody (PUPC)
The following are the policies and procedures in the admission,
visitation, transfer and release of Persons Under Police Custody (PUPC)
(PNP Memorandum Circular 2018-027):
1) Admission
The pertinent data of the PUPC shall be encoded in the e-Rogues
and other NGIS as applicable.
The following can be detained/admitted in PNP custodial facilities:
a) Accused covered by a Warrant of Arrest or a Commitment
Order issued by the court; and
b) Arrested suspects who are under custodial investigation.
However, under no circumstances should the arrested
suspects under custodial investigation be held in custodial
facilities beyond the prescribed reglementary period, unless,
while in custody, appropriate charges have been filed and
Chapter 3



142
Commitment Order has been issued by the court concerned
or he/she signed the required waiver of the rights under the
provisions of Article 125 of the RPC.
2) Requirements for Admission
In situations where the arresting police unit has no existing custodial
facility, they may request admission of the PUPC to another police unit,
provided that they submit the following mandatory requirements:
a) Request for custody or Commitment Order;
b) Proof of medical examination or medical certificate of the
PUPC; and
c) Case folder of the PUPC containing, among others, the
accomplished booking sheet.
3) Segregation of PUPC
Segregation according to gender and classification of crimes
committed by PUPC shall be observed.
4) Visitation
Visitorial rights of a PUPC shall be subject to the following
conditions:
a) Security rules and regulations of the facility such as but not
limited to:
(1) The number of visitors at any given time;
(2) Non-wearing of similar color with the PUPC’s uniform;
and
(3) Prohibition on the use or possession of camera, video
equipment, cellular phone and similar devices.
b) Presentation of public and/or pertinent documents to prove
relationship;
Chapter 3



143
c) Prohibition of conjugal visits.
5) Transfer of Custody
a) Upon receipt of the Commitment Order from the court, the
Chief, Custodial Facility shall coordinate with the issuing
court to ascertain the validity of the order. Upon confirmation,
he/she must coordinate with the receiving detention facility
for the immediate transfer of custody; and
b) Prior to the transfer, the PUPC shall be subjected to medical
examination by a PNP medical officer or, in his/her absence,
any government physician.
6) Release
a) The Chief, Custodial Facility shall be the sole approving
authority in releasing the PUPC.
b) Upon receipt of the Release Order from the court, the Chief,
Custodial Facility shall coordinate with the issuing court to
ascertain the validity of the order. Upon confirmation, he/she
must coordinate with the arresting unit if there are other legal
impediments to the release.
c) The Chief, Custodial Facility shall likewise check from the
PNP e-Warrant System to determine if the PUPC to be
released has other pending warrants of arrest.
d) If there are valid grounds for continuous detention, the Chief,
Custodial Facility shall inform and coordinate with the court
that issued the release order immediately or within five days
from notice.
e) Prior to the official release of the PUPC, he/she must undergo
another medical examination at any PNP Health Service unit
or Rural Health Unit.
f) The Chief, Custodial Facility shall coordinate with the
arresting officer for the release of all the properties seized
Chapter 3



144
from the PUPC, except for those items still being used as
evidence and those forfeited in favor of the government.
c. Transporting of PUPC
1) The PUPC must be properly escorted and handcuffed at all times
and seated/positioned in the vehicle in a manner that prevents his/
her escape and deny him/her the opportunity to endanger the lives
of PNP personnel. Female PUPC shall be escorted by a police
woman;
2) The transport of PUPC shall be done using official PNP vehicles.
Other vehicles may be utilized subject to the approval of the head
of the concerned unit;
3) PUPCs shall as much as possible be transported wearing PUPC’s
uniform or proper attire that may identify them as PUPCs;
4) Transport of PUPC shall be limited only to the following:
a) To the proper office for inquest, or court for hearing;
b) To the nearest hospital/clinic in case of the mandatory
medical examination or during actual medical emergency;
c) To the designated evacuation area exclusive for PUPCs
during a crisis situation;
d) During court-permitted transport; and
e) Other analogous circumstances
6.5 Instituting Criminal Actions
a. Inquest Procedures
1) The inquest proceedings shall commence upon the presentation of
arrested person, unless his/her absence is justified, and witness/es
by the police officer before the inquest prosecutor. The concerned
police officer shall submit the following documents:
Chapter 3



145
a) Case Referral signed by the Chief of Office (Annex “QQ”);
b) Affidavit of Arrest (Annex “RR”);
c) Statement(s) of the complainant(s) (Annex “SS”);
d) Affidavit(s) of the witness(es) if any (Annex “TT”); and
e) Other supporting evidence gathered by law enforcement
authorities during their investigation of the criminal incident
involving the arrested person.
2) The investigator shall also ensure that the documents to be presented
during the inquest proceedings shall comply with the guidelines
and procedures provided in the existing investigation manuals and
procedures, including but not limited to:
a) A.M. No. 21-06-08-SC (Rules on the Use of Body-Worn
Cameras in the Execution of Warrants and Warrantless Arrest);
b) PNP Criminal Investigation Manual 2011;
c) DOJ-NBI-PDEA-PNP Unified Manual in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Anti-Illegal Drug Cases 2021;
d) Murder/ Homicide Investigation Manual;
e) Revised Standard Operating Procedure: Trafficking in Persons
In Investigation Manual 2017;
f) Manual In Handling Children at Risk and Children in Conflict
with the Law; or
g) Women And Children Protection Desk Investigator’s Manual.
b. Waiver of Rights
The inquest shall proceed unless the arrested person opts for a
preliminary investigation by executing the required waiver of rights under
Article 125 of the RPC (Annex “UU”).
Chapter 3



146
c. Preliminary Investigation and Direct Filing
1) Preliminary Investigation
This is an inquiry or proceeding to determine whether there is
sufficient ground to engender a well-founded belief that a crime has
been committed and the respondent is probably guilty thereof and
should be held for trial.
It is required to be conducted by the Provincial or City Prosecutors
and their assistants, National and Regional State Prosecutors; and other
officers as may be authorized by law before the filing of a complaint or
information for an offense where the penalty prescribed by law is at
least four years, two months and one day without regard to the fine.
2) Direct Filing
For all other offenses where preliminary investigation is not
required, the concerned investigator may file the complaint directly
with the Municipal Trial Courts and Municipal Circuit Trial Courts, or the
complaint with the office of the prosecutor. In Manila and other chartered
cities, the complaint shall be filed with the office of the prosecutor, unless
otherwise provided in their charters.
In the following instances, the concerned investigator shall file
cases with the prosecutor’s office thru regular filing when:
(a) The suspect has not been arrested but there is sufficient
evidence to warrant the filing of the case; or
(b) When there was an arrest by virtue of a warrantless arrest
pursuant to Rule 113, Section 5 of the Rules of Court, but the
reglementary period to file the case has already lapsed
The requirements stated in 6.6a shall likewise be complied with,
as may be applicable.
d. Attendance to Court Duties
PNP personnel shall ensure that they dutifully attend court hearings.
The concerned subpoena court process officer from the PNP shall ensure the
Chapter 3



147
attendance of the aforesaid PNP personnel by utilizing the PNP e-subpoena
system (PNP MC 2014-016).
e. Monitoring of Cases by the Investigators
After the investigators file the cases at the prosecutor’s offices, they shall
continuously monitor the case up to final resolution. They are also required to
upload in the Case Information and Database Management System (CIDMS)
all their case folders and the updates.
6.6 Investigation by the Local Police Unit After an Armed Confrontation
a. Responsibility of the Local Police Unit. The Police Unit that has territorial
jurisdiction over the area where the armed confrontation occurred shall
conduct threat assessment prior to response, secure and preserve the
crime scene.
b. Processing of the Crime Scene. The concerned Police Unit shall
immediately request the SOCO Team to conduct crime scene processing
(PNP SOP ODIDM-2011-008).
c. Disposition of Firearms, Cartridges and Bullets Used, Seized, or
Recovered in the absence of SOCO Team
1) After an armed confrontation resulting from any police operation,
all firearms, cartridges and bullets seized or recovered, including
those used by PNP personnel and other law enforcement agents
in case of a joint operation, shall immediately be submitted
with proper markings to the nearest CL office for examination
procedures.
2) The IOC shall perform the following:
a) Personally submit the used, seized or recovered firearms,
cartridges and bullets to the nearest CL Office;
b) Place all firearm evidence separately in properly labeled selfsealing plastic bags or appropriate similar containers;
Chapter 3



148
c) Submit the photo of the firearm and the receipt issued by the
nearest CL Office for the said firearms, cartridges and bullets
to the prosecutor or the court (DOJ DC 67-2015); and
d) Request for a subpoena addressed to the firearms evidence
custodian of the CL Office to present the firearms, cartridges
and bullets, if their physical submission is required.
d. Disposition of Other Evidence Used, Seized or Recovered
If there are explosives found after an armed confrontation, the operating
unit shall seek the assistance of the EODT. Other evidence intended for
examination, in the absence of SOCO, shall be properly marked and turnedover to the CL Office or other concerned PNP units.
e. Procedures to be Followed in Case Persons Died
In cases of armed confrontation resulting in the death of suspects,
victims, PNP personnel or other law enforcement agents, the location where
the incident occurred shall be treated as a crime scene and the procedures in
the conduct of CSI provided in Rule 6.1 of this POP shall be followed.
The IAS shall also conduct, motu proprio, automatic investigation of
incidents that resulted in the death of suspects or victims.
6.7 Procedures in the Investigation of Heinous and Sensational Crimes
a. Whenever a heinous or sensational crime is committed, the concerned
COP or Station Commander shall immediately assess the situation and
communicate with the DD/PD/CD the attendant circumstances and its
updates which will be the basis of the DD/PD/CD for recommending
to the RD whether there is a need to activate the Special Investigation
Task Group (SITG).
b. Concerned COP or Station Commander shall base his/her assessment
and recommendation on the report of the FRs and his/her assigned
IOC. The creation of the SITG is not necessary for crimes that can be
resolved at their level. Otherwise, a District/PPO/CPO level SITG shall
be organized that will take cognizance of the investigation of heinous
and sensational cases initially investigated by the City/Municipal/District
Police Stations.
Chapter 3



149
c. The creation of SITG and procedures to be followed shall be governed
by the procedures in the investigation of heinous and sensational crimes
provided in the PNP SOP Number 2012-003.
6.8 Investigation of Violence Against Women and Children (VAW/C) and
other Gender-Based Violence (GBV)
a. Investigation of Complaints and Reports Involving All Forms of VAW/C
and other GBV
The PNP Women and Children Protection Desk (WCPD) shall
conduct a timely, thorough, and comprehensive investigation of all cases
involving VAW/C and other GBV such as those provided in the DIDM
Investigative Directive 2016-09, the Women and Children Protection Desk
Investigator’s Manual and other subsequent related issuances consistent
with domestic laws, rules and regulations, and International Human Rights
standards. Any response must be child sensitive, gender-sensitive, rightsbased and disability sensitive.
The following investigation procedures shall be conducted by WCPD
Investigators:
1) Upon the receipt of report/complaint, the WCPD Investigator
shall conduct initial interview using the standard Incident Record
Form (IRF) and record the incident in the pink blotter;
2) The WCPD Investigator shall determine the level of risk or safety
issue of the victim and/or his/her family. If necessary, refer the
victim-survivor to the Local Social Welfare and Development
Office (LSWDO) or other support services/agencies for rescue,
monitoring or welfare checks or application and enforcement of
protection order.
3) The WCPD Investigator, whenever necessary, shall refer the
victim-survivor to the nearest PNP CL Office or any hospital/
medical facility for appropriate medico-legal examination. As far
as possible, the examining physician must be of the same sex
as the victim-survivor, especially in sexual violence cases;
4) Only persons expressly authorized by the victim-survivor
shall be allowed inside the room where police investigation
Chapter 3



150
or medical/physical examination is being conducted, except
when the victim-survivor is a child, where the presence of the
unoffending parent or guardian and social worker is required;
5) Ensure the confidentiality of identity of the victim-survivor and all
other parties directly involved with the case under investigation.
For this purpose, the WCPD Investigator must record the same
in the pink blotter. The media shall not be allowed any access to
information concerning VAW/C and GBV reported to the PNP;
6) Upon the determination of the readiness of the victim to give
statement, the WCPD Investigator shall conduct the victimsensitive interview. Before documenting or recording the
interview, the WCPD investigator shall secure the consent of the
victim-survivor. If victim-survivor is a child, the accompanying
social worker or non-offending guardian or parent/adult shall
give the consent on behalf of the child.
7) The complaint, together with all relevant evidence, shall be
referred to the Prosecutor’s Office for appropriate legal action.
The WCPD Investigator shall ensure the privacy of the victimsurvivor and the confidentiality of the case at all times. The
name and personal circumstances of the victim-survivor or any
other information tending to establish his/her identity and that of
his/her family shall not be disclosed to the public.
8) The WCPD Officer, in coordination with the territorial police unit,
shall use all reasonable means to enforce a protection order to
prevent further violence to the victim-survivor;
b. Rescue, Temporary Shelter and Protective Custody of Child VictimSurvivor
The WCPD Investigator, in coordination with the LSWDO, shall
investigate on all cases of child abuse committed within their respective area
of responsibility, consistent with domestic laws, rules and regulations, and
international human rights.
1) Any Police officer, upon receipt of a complaint or report or
information that a child has been or is being abused, maltreated,
Chapter 3



151
exploited, neglected, or abandoned, or is under imminent
danger of being abused or exploited, shall take immediate
action thereon and coordinate with the WCPD Investigator, but
under no circumstance shall be beyond 48 hours;
2) Any police officer, on a reasonable suspicion that a person is
a victim of any offense defined under RA 9208 as amended by
RA 10364, in coordination with WCPD, shall immediately place
that person in the temporary custody of the LSWDO, or any
accredited or licensed shelter institution devoted to protecting
trafficked persons after the rescue;
3) Whenever the investigation shows evidence of labor exploitation
or violation of labor standards involving a child, the WCPD
investigator shall coordinate with the DOLE in the conduct of a
rescue operation. A representative from the DOLE and LSWDO
shall be invited as part of the rescue team.
4) In instances where the DOLE representative was not part of
the rescue operation, the WCPD officer may file a petition/
application for the closure of establishment before the DOLE
when there is evidence of worst form of child labor as provided
for by Special Protection of Children Against Child Abuse,
Exploitation and Discrimination Act (RA 9231 sec.12-d).
5) The WCPD Investigator shall ensure that the child shall not be
subjected or exposed to revictimization during investigation.
c. Procedures in the Rescue of a Child
1) A rescue team, to be headed by the WCPD, shall be activated.
They shall coordinate with representatives from LSWDO,
Barangay Council for the Protection of Children (BCPC), and
other concerned agencies for the conduct of rescue operations.
2) The rescue team shall formulate and execute the operational
plan. All police officers participating in the rescue operations
shall be in prescribed uniform. Only members of the team who
will be in direct contact with the child shall be in plain clothes
Chapter 3



152
to make the child feel comfortable. They must have a PNP
identification card to show when required.
3) Upon arrival at the place of rescue, the police officers shall
secure the area and properly introduce themselves and inform
the custodian of the child as to the purpose of their operation.
d. Procedures to be Observed in the Handling of Children at Risk (CAR),
Children in Conflict with the Law (CICL) and Children Involved in Armed
Conflict (CIAC)
When handling a case involving a CAR, CICL, or CIAC, the PNP
personnel shall keep in mind that the child has rights that has to be
protected. He/she shall not threaten the child with any kind of violence or
use vulgar language or allow the other concerned parties from doing the
same. The parents/guardians of the CAR, CICL or CIAC shall be notified
within eight hours from the time of the physical custody of the child and shall
be referred to the appropriate agencies for the necessary intervention. The
PNP personnel shall only use necessary and proportionate force to subdue
a resisting child and where such force will only be used as a last resort. In
no case shall the physical custody of the CAR, CICL or CIAC be retained in
a custodial facility.
1) If the incident is involving CAR and CICL, the PNP personnel
shall ensure observance of and adherence to the provisions of
the Manual in Handling Cases of Children at Risk and Children
in Conflict with the Law and the provisions of the Juvenile Justice
and Welfare Act (RA 9344), as amended.
2) If the incident is involving CICL, the IOC, upon completion of the
processing, shall ensure to turn over the custody of the child to
the LSWDO or other accredited NGOs within eight hours after
apprehension. However, in cases where the child is 15 years
old or below, the IOC shall immediately release the child to the
custody of the child’s parents or guardian (RA 9344 sec. 21i)
3) If the incident is involving CIAC, the PNP personnel shall observe
the provisions of RA 11188 on its implementing rules and
regulations and the handling protocol on children in situations of
armed conflict.
Chapter 3



153
4) The CIAC shall not be criminally liable for crimes they committed
as CIAC and shall be treated as victims. However, the protocol
for the handling of cases of CICL shall apply when the acts
committed by the CIAC are the following:
a) Grave child rights violations; or
b) Committed not as a child involved in armed conflict.
5) If the crime is cognizable by the WCPD as stated in the DIDM
Investigative Directive 2016-09 and other related issuances, the
WCPD shall investigate the case. In all other cases, investigation
of the incident shall be made by the unit that has jurisdiction over
the offense but the child who is CAR, CICL, or CIAC shall be
processed by the WCPD.
Rule 7 Police Community Relations (PCR)
7.1 Essence of PCR
PCR is indispensable in the PNP organization as it is geared towards
forging a partnership with the community to promote a shared responsibility in
addressing peace and order. A strong relationship between the police and the
community establishes a harmonious and peaceful environment achieved through
proper coordination and communication.
PCR showcases its significance as being the first among equals in the
quad concept of police operations because it fosters an environment conducive
for effective crime prevention and solution efforts including other police activities.
7.2 General Guidelines
a. All personnel shall endeavor to manifest a character that enables him/
her to win the hearts and minds of the community and strive to establish
and maintain a good relationship with them;
Chapter 3



154
b. PCR activities shall aim towards addressing the various concerns on
peace and order and public safety in the community. The proper conduct
of PCR activities is essential in maintaining a positive public perception;
c. The community shall be informed on the PNP community-based
programs and activities to gain support and address information gaps;
and
d. The PNP awareness, organization and mobilization efforts shall take
into consideration the prevailing situation in the community.
7.3 Public Information
This refers to the dissemination of information that may be of interest to the
general public about policies, procedures, advisories, and events involving the
PNP or other newsworthy accomplishments that are cleared for release.
a. Protocols in Releasing Information. Prior to the sharing of information,
the following shall be performed:
1) Validate the accuracy and timeliness of the information;
2) Seek approval of the Unit Commander/Head of Office/authorized
representative who shall ensure that the information is:
a) Intended to empower and educate the community;
b) Purposive to the community safety and security to encourage
them to participate in an information chain that reduces fear
and eliminate the prevalence of crime;
c) Respectful of the privacy and dignity of an individual
particularly the victim of a crime; and
d) Not prejudicial to the safety and security of the state or an
individual.
3) Release information only by authorized personnel through official
channels maximizing the use of TRIMP.
Chapter 3



155
b. Media Relations Protocols
1) Observe courtesy and proper decorum and avoid arguments;
2) Never give unofficial or classified information. In cases when
information may not be disclosed to the media, the basis for such
shall be fully and courteously explained;
3) Press statements and PNP media lines shall be consistent with
established facts;
4) Suspect/s arrested for any violation of the law shall in no case be
presented in a “firing line” during press briefings;
5) As a general rule, the interview of PUPC by the media is prohibited.
However, if the PUPC volunteers to be interviewed, he/she may
be allowed to do so subject to existing rules and regulations of the
custodial facility;
6) In cases of inter-agency operations, the department/agency with
primary jurisdiction shall assume the responsibility in dealing with
the media; and
7) All request for information shall be in consonance with the PNP
People’s Freedom of Information Manual.
c. Media Relations During Crisis
The Crisis Communication Action Team (CCAT) (Annex “VV”) shall be
activated at the appropriate level to provide crisis communication strategies
to manage issues with negative impact on the PNP and to inform the public
to avoid fear and confusion of an ongoing critical development. It utilizes
protocols for effective communication, particularly during a major threat or
incident, to keep the community safe and secure.
The CCAT shall support the designated Public Information Officer (PIO)
of the established CIMTG at all levels and shall be guided by the following:
1) The CCAT, in coordination with the IC, is the only authorized group
to release information to the media through the designated PIO of
the CIMTG;
Chapter 3



156
2) Media area for pooled coverage shall be situated from a safe
distance and where, as far as practicable, the incident is not
visible; and
3) Media shall be prohibited to cover actual police operations during
human-induced crisis such as but not limited to hostage situations
or any similar incidents.
d. Social Media Protocols
These are policies that guide PNP personnel in using the social media
particularly in sharing information. It promotes the responsible use of social
media and ensures that PNP policies and laws of the state are observed.
Social media posting of information shall adhere to the following:
1) Ensure that posts shall be based on facts;
2) Ensure that posts are approved by the Social Network Supervisor
and the Social Media Officer;
3) Ensure that classified matters/information about the PNP
organization are not published; and
4) Ensure that posts on personal circumstances, tasks, and projects
shall neither compromise any operation nor endanger the lives of
personnel and stakeholders.
7.4 Information Development Operations (IDO)
It is the development and application of means to influence the perception
and decision-making of a specific Target Audience (TA) in support to the strategic
communication of the government.
a. Three Classifications of IDO:
1) Offensive, which is the conduct of proactive measures on
anticipated or emerging issues before it becomes a crisis;
2) Defensive, which refers to controlling the crisis or situation from
scaling; and
Chapter 3



157
3) Extensive, which is a day-to-day routine of crafting and developing
products that convey a strong message in the form of visual aids
such as memes, infographics, informercials, and printed materials
derived from facts and plain news.
b. Strategic Communication
The IDO provides support for the Strategic Communication (StratCom)
to orchestrate actions, words and images to achieve strategic goals and
to advance the organization’s interest, policies and objectives. The main
objective of StratCom is to address real-time issues which affects the state
of the nation. The following are the guidelines in carrying out StratCom:
1) PNP units shall have trained Police Community Affairs and
Development (PCAD) officers to lead in carrying out PCAD
activities and efforts;
2) Stratcom plans and activities shall be developed with achievable,
measurable and time-bound content;
3) StratCom shall be crafted in order to affect positively the
thinking faculties and eventually the behaviors of the purposely
predetermined TA;
4) TAs shall be classified as either internal or external to the PNP.
This will aid the StratCom crafters to appropriately identify their
plan of actions as well as the useful tools;
5) The themes and messages shall be produced in the form of
words, actions, and images or a combination thereof specific to
each classification of target audience and they can be expressed
through the following channels using various IDOs; social media
platforms; television; radio; and print (press release, leaflets,
glossy sheets, broadsheets, tabloids, infographics, etc.)
7.5 Police Community Affairs and Development
PCAD covers the awareness, organization, and mobilization of the
community for crime prevention, lawlessness resistance and overall security of the
area relative to peace and order, public safety, and development.
Chapter 3



158
a. PCAD programs and activities shall be guided by the following:
1) There shall be trained PCAD personnel in all police stations to
lead the various PCAD programs and activities;
2) PCAD programs and activities shall be regularly conducted to
sustain the partnership and collaboration with the community;
3) There shall be social investigation/community study on the physical
environment, economic status, lifestyle, cultural and socio-political
standing, and others, necessary for program conceptualization
to address societal/peace and order issues/problems in the
community;
4) There shall be coordination, collaboration and cooperation with
concerned government agencies, NGOs, and stakeholders in the
conduct of various PCAD programs and activities;
5) PNP units shall initiate and assist in disaster relief operations,
medical support operations, rescue operations, communitybased education and training, and other urgent and non-urgent
assistance;
6) Trained and organized groups shall serve as active partners and
force multipliers in the conduct of PCAD programs and activities;
7) PNP units/offices shall assess PCAD programs and activities
through various tools including community feedback to determine
their effectiveness; and
8) In certain situations where NGOs are involved in community
organizing, PCAD personnel should understand that the NGOs’
participation is purely voluntary.
b. Community Engagement and Awareness Procedures
1) Conduct Target Audience and Issue Analysis (TAIA) to assess the
priority concerns in the community;
2) Coordinate and collaborate with the barangay officials and other
community leaders before the conduct of information dissemination
drives to the identified TAs;
Chapter 3



159
3) Serve as lecturer/resource speaker during community engagement
and awareness activities; and
4) Sustain the conduct of community engagement and awareness
activities.
c. Community Organizing Procedures
1) Prepare a database/list of people in the community and their
significant roles;
2) Engage the community through seminar/lecture, pulong-pulong,
ugnayan sa barangay, and other information dissemination drives;
3) Form core groups and identify potential contacts and leaders in
each target community/sector to determine their concerns;
4) Conduct thorough validation and verification of intentions and
requirements for accreditation of sectoral groups and other entities;
5) Conduct community/sector selection to determine and assess
what programs and activities are feasible;
6) Visit the local community/sector leaders to inform them of the
nature/objectives of programs and activities to be implemented;
7) Immerse and participate in social and economic activities to adapt
and familiarize oneself with the community/sector; and
8) Take the lead in the actual mobilization of organized groups.
d. Community Mobilization Procedures
1) Ensure that the organized groups to be mobilized must be trained/
capacitated based on their respective fields of interest;
2) Supervise the activities and participation of the organized groups
in various PCAD programs and activities;
3) Conduct briefing and debriefing with the organized groups in all
PCAD programs and activities;
Chapter 3



160
4) Ensure regular monitoring and assessment of the organized
groups in the community; and
5) Recognize/acknowledge the effort and participation of the
community and organized groups.
7.6 Gender and Development (GAD)
GAD in the PNP organization is human rights-based and it is the responsibility
of a police officer to protect and promote such rights. This recognizes that gender
biases impede development because they prevent people from attaining the full
potentials that enable them to become effective contributors to and beneficiaries of
development. It is about adhering to the principle that development is for all.
Fairness and equity demand that everyone in society, whether male or
female, has the right to the same opportunities to achieve a full and satisfying life.
a. The Role of Police Officers as Advocates of GAD
The PNP promotes women empowerment and pursues equal
opportunities for men and women and ensures equal access to resources
and development results and outcomes in the organization (RA 9710, 2009).
1) Deployment of Female Police During Operations
a) Ensure that a corresponding number of female police
personnel shall be included in the team;
b) Ensure that the same roles are performed within the gender
policies of equal work standard; and
c) Consider the health condition of pregnant police women.
2) Deployment Of WCPD Officers in Evacuation Areas
a) Ensure that male and female WCPD officers are deployed to
assist the women and children in evacuation areas; and
b) Ensure availability of an interview/investigation room in the
evacuation area for the protection of the victim’s privacy
during the interview.
Chapter 3



161
3) Decent Custodial Facilities for Both Male and Female PUPCs
a) Ensure that custodial facilities are compliant with the
international standards for jails and prisons;
b) Ensure separate custodial facilities and comfort rooms for
male and female PUPCs to avoid any form of abuse; and
c) Ensure that concerns of female PUPCs must be handled by
female PNP duty guard as well.
4) Promotion of Gender Equality and Development
a) Advocate gender equality;
b) Use gender-fair language;
c) Provide equal opportunity to all gender;
d) Treat people equally;
e) Uphold equal justice for everyone;
f) Adhere strictly to human rights;
g) Avoid victim-blaming;
h) Stop violence against women and children and marginalized
sectors of the community;
i) Stop hate crime (color of skin, gender preference, economic
& social status); and
j) Do not discriminate.
7.7 Salaam Police (\suh·lam\)
Salaam Police Center (SPC) is established to foster better Police-Muslim
Community relationships. Assigning dedicated PNP personnel, preferably Muslims,
with the SPC provides a proactive and forward-looking response to promote law
and order within Muslim communities taking into consideration indigenous cultures,
Chapter 3



162
traditions, and institutions of the Muslims as well as building awareness about their
rights and responsibilities as part of Filipino society.
Physical presence of Salaam Police personnel is essential in cultivating
community trust, thereby building and sustaining community support and
engagement that will further build cooperative relationships between Muslims and
the PNP.
a. Islamic Cultural and Religious Sensitivities
Filipino Muslims, traditionally located in Mindanao, came from many
cultural and ethnic backgrounds. They further spread in other parts of the
country due to migration. However, there were negative issues concerning
Muslims in the community, affecting relationships which become a law
enforcement concern. It is therefore imperative for the PNP to understand
their culture and sentiments to gain their trust and respect.
All PNP personnel shall observe the following guidelines to preserve
cultural and Islamic religious sensitivities (CMC 08-2021):
1) Bridge the culture gap with good communication skills;
2) Be respectful during interaction with Foreign Islamic Missionaries;
3) Practice good manners;
4) Honor and respect traditional holidays, festivals and food; and
5) Respect cultural differences.
b. Engagement with Muslim communities:
All PNP personnel are encouraged to observe or respect these Muslim
customs and traditions including but not limited to the following:
1) When addressing a religious leader, use formal religious titles
such as brother/sister or imam unless instructed otherwise;
2) When greeted by the Arabic salutation “As-salamu Alaikum”
(peace be upon you), the response is “Wa Alaikum as Salaam”
(and upon you be peace) and vice versa;
Chapter 3



163
3) When interacting with Muslims of the opposite sex, do not initiate
handshakes or embrace unless offered;
4) When entering a mosque, prayer room or Islamic center, remove
shoes as respect to their sacred space. If not wearing a PNP
uniform, PNP personnel should dress modestly. Policewomen
should cover their heads, arms, and legs. Ask permission before
participating in religious worship services;
5) PNP personnel shall respect the Muslims’ observance of the
Holy Month of Ramadan. Regular duty schedules shall, as far as
practicable, be flexible to accommodate Muslim PNP personnel
who are fasting and rendering five ritual prayers daily. In engaging
the Muslim community, schedules should be flexible and food/
drinks should not be served;
6) PNP personnel should be aware of Muslim religious dietary laws
written in the Quran. These dietary laws are defined by the Arabic
terms halal (permitted) and haram (prohibited).
7) As far as practicable, Muslim PNP personnel shall be given
consideration with respect to Friday as the day of congregational
prayer; and
8) PNP personnel should recognize the two important Islamic
festivities, “Eid al Fit’r” and “Eid al Adha”. A typical greeting to
be observed for these holidays is “Eid Mubarak”, which means
blessed celebration.
Chapter 3

